# 2021 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster

2020-12-31

- [Roll call here](#roll-call-here)
- [Upcoming agenda and notes](#upcoming-agenda-and-notes)
- [Previous Agenda and Notes](#previous-agenda-and-notes)
  - [13 January 2021 1700 UTC](#13-january-2021-1700-utc)
  - [~~27 January 2021 2300 UTC~~](#27-january-2021-2300-utc)
  - [10 February 2021 1700 UTC](#10-february-2021-1700-utc)
  - [24 February 2021 2300 UTC](#24-february-2021-2300-utc)
  - [10 March 2021 1700 UTC](#10-march-2021-1700-utc)
  - [24 March 2021 2300 UTC](#24-march-2021-2300-utc)
  - [7 April 2021 1700 UTC](#7-april-2021-1700-utc)
  - [21 April 2021 2300 UTC](#21-april-2021-2300-utc)
  - [5 May 2021 1700 UTC](#5-may-2021-1700-utc)
  - [19 May 2021 2300 UTC](#19-may-2021-2300-utc)
  - [2 June 2021 1700 UTC](#2-june-2021-1700-utc)
  - [16 June 2021 2300 UTC](#16-june-2021-2300-utc)
  - [30 June 2021 1700 UTC](#30-june-2021-1700-utc)
  - [~~14 July 2021 2300 UTC~~](#14-july-2021-2300-utc)
  - [~~28 July 2021 1700 UTC~~](#28-july-2021-1700-utc)
  - [11 August 2021 2300 UTC](#11-august-2021-2300-utc)
  - [25 August 2021 1700 UTC](#25-august-2021-1700-utc)
  - [22 September 2021 - 1700 UTC](#22-september-2021---1700-utc)
  - [20 October 2021 - 2300 UTC](#20-october-2021---2300-utc)
  - [17 November 2021 - 1700 UTC](#17-november-2021---1700-utc)
  - [15 December 2021 - 2300 UTC](#15-december-2021---2300-utc)
- [Ideas for future topics](#ideas-for-future-topics)
- [Meeting org logistics](#meeting-org-logistics)
  - [How to `SOIl cluster`](#how-to-soil-cluster)
- [Introductions](#introductions)
- [Past years](#past-years)
  - [2020 Soil ontology - Notes and
    Agenda](#2020-soil-ontology---notes-and-agenda)

Cluster wiki page:
<https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil_Ontologies_and_Informatics>

Mailing list:
<http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics>

Cluster proposal: [ESIP Soil Ontology and Informatics Clustering
proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wyplA7K7IHIY_yPXTydfFYNTwiXyrZY2R_9lu3LjRhk/edit?usp=sharing)

YouTube channel:
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5_i8iJW_fzrdsUBR6cBs3LT5Tz>

Current soil data landscape: [Current soil data
landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing)

# Roll call here

<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing> -
If you are new (this year), please scroll down and add a brief
introduction.

# Upcoming agenda and notes

# Previous Agenda and Notes

## 13 January 2021 1700 UTC

1.  How are we going to do this? How do we get the information we are
    wanting to model into a more …malleable form? (not in a report or
    between your ears)  
2.  How do we want to construct/iterate on an ontology?
    1.  Draft/revise
        1.  One person drafts an ontology and sends it around for
            revisions
            1.  Git?  
    2.  Committee construction
        1.  Jamboard or similar and small breakout rooms:
            <https://jamboard.google.com/d/1IKw68k-CTQVecbIL2fgCps3rC1UXT_fB64v562XR0rs/edit?usp=sharing>  
    3.  ????  
3.  Other future topics this year

NOTES  
Spreadsheet with terms/use-case/competency-questions: [Soil properties
and
competency](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11oY2TIQIVnaNYfG-nXiOfWyQ17uVlReNX4qrdOYddeg/edit?usp=sharing)

- What terms?
  - Bulk density  
  - Organic carbon  
  - Ksat  
- Use case examples
  - Link to specific questions  
- Competency questions?
  - Discriminate between sieved vs unsieved and oven-dried vs
    field-moist bulk density?  
  - How was the volume determined for bulk density?  
  - What was the sample protocol and is it comparable?  
  - When and where and how deep sample was the sample taken?  
  - Relevant land cover classifications or ground type?  
  - Frozen/permafrost  
- Tools for brainstorming?
  - Miro-board (<https://miro.com/>): the free account will support a
    small number of concurrent users (have tried up to 4-ish concurrent
    users) collaborating on a shared miro-board (=white board), has
    commenting functions. (shoot an email to if you have questions)  
  - Jamboard or similar and small breakout rooms:
    <https://jamboard.google.com/d/1IKw68k-CTQVecbIL2fgCps3rC1UXT_fB64v562XR0rs/edit?usp=sharing>  
  - 

ENVO example:
<http://www.ontobee.org/ontology/ENVO?iri=http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_00000134>  
Modeling aspects of methods  
CI/detection  
Scales of derived data products

OTHER NOTES

1.  How do we continue with creating the Ontology?
    1.  Are there a list of properties or concepts similar to bulk
        density that we can iterate through
        1.  A list of terms and a list of brainstorming tools that
            people feel comfortable with
            1.  Word map then git repository?  
            2.  Table?  
2.  How many terms do we want to start with
    1.  For GLOSIS we had huge property lists  
    2.  The idea is that we have several different areas/groups of terms
        1.  People can jump in and out as they have time  
        2.  Can go where they feel most comfortable  
    3.  Bulk density and carbon fraction could be good starting points
        1.  KSAT - hydrology terms (Tanya)
            1.  Has reach across several fields  
    4.  20-50 related terms is a good place to start (Pier)
        1.  Might not need more than the three suggested (bulk density,
            carbon fraction, and KSAT) because of their richness
            1.  For example bulk density has 10 or more other terms
                (sieved or unsieved, etc.)  
            2.  Extends in different ways (methodology, etc.)  
            3.  What stuff around bulk density is important
                1.  The soil itself or methodology
                    1.  Methodology as it is important to interpret
                        data  
3.  Competency questions
    1.  With this ontology we should be able to achieve ??
        1.  Small hierarchy of equipment, of methodology itself, etc.
            1.  Allow other people to fill in the broader definitions  
    2.  Define with these questions to aid with the development of the
        ontology
        1.  Overall people agree with Pier  
4.  Next Step
    1.  How about the sensitivity of different methods/ontology on
        modeling aspects?
        1.  Overall people liked this idea but it is a large rabbit hole
            to jump down right now  
        2.  At some point there would be ranges of certainty (the
            minimum we can capture)
            1.  Scales for modeling
                1.  Can lead to different uncertainties  
                2.  Think about uncertainties as we think about the
                    methods  
        3.  Do not necessarily have to build the ontology for models
            1.  Provide metadata
                1.  This instance is on this scale  
                2.  Modelers can use this  
                3.  If you use consistent metadata then it will help
                    modelers solve their own competency questions  
            2.  As long as we include things like detection limits,
                whether it was a grid, etc. this will satisfy = just
                associate the specific metadata included for these
                specific instances (Pier)  
5.  Competency questions
    1.  Definition - the ontology should be competent of answering the
        decided query
        1.  Want the ontology to be capable of achieving X  
    2.  Being about to distinguish between sieved and unsieved and
        between Oven dried and field dried, moist or dense  
    3.  What is the extraction process? Does it conserve the volume
        within the environment?
        1.  How is the material volumetrically removed from the site to
            sustain it? Volume constraint? How is that maintained?  
        2.  We need the process and the properties before and after
            sample was taken
            1.  Depth of sample taken  
            2.  Where? When? How deep? Horizon?  
        3.  Relevant land cover class, permafrost
            1.  Permafrost may or not have ice  
            2.  Process of melting  
            3.  Whether or not the permafrost melts determines whether
                there is melting and how the structure changes.
                1.  Crosswalk to cryo-semantics  
            4.  Example:
                <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_00000134>  
    4.  Use case
        1.  Derive competency questions from use case?  
        2.  Agricultural soil or other soils
            1.  Active or retired  
    5.  Ultimate goal of the ontology
        1.  Methods or sample?  
        2.  If I am putting in a sample, I want someone to be able to
            determine the relative metadata
            1.  Depending on how you use it there are different levels
                of granularity  
6.  Dr. TB will send out a long message or survey to other members that
    couldn’t make this meeting so that they can brainstorm.
    1.  Jamboard!  
    2.  During brainstorming, list properties that are important to you
        1.  Top term that gets voted up we will start with  
        2.  <https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11oY2TIQIVnaNYfG-nXiOfWyQ17uVlReNX4qrdOYddeg/edit?usp=sharing>  
7.  Meeting on the 10th at 12:00PM Eastern
    1.  Pier might be able to lead meeting  
    2.  Brandon is also a maybe  
    3.  Kathe can run backup with some pointers

## ~~27 January 2021 2300 UTC~~

ESIP WINTER MEETING =\> No cluster call

## 10 February 2021 1700 UTC

Recap  
Thank you to everyone who made it onto the cluster call today! We talked
about ways forward and got some feedback on next steps. Kathe T-B
sketched out some possible future activities that could lead to new
tools (or identification of existing tools) for data harmonization.
Tanja W made a point of reminding us that we shouldn’t leave the
qualitative human readable data descriptions behind as we move forward.
Fenny vE identified some European data sets that we might consider in
addition to CSIRO and NRCS. Margaret O offered to help process EDI data
holdings by scraping up the meta-data registered for those data sets.

To get us started I’ve created a new repository. If **you are familiar
with a soil data product please help** us get started by going here and
identifying how layer level samples are described in the data:
<https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization/issues/1> and identify the
soil data product itself here:
<https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization/issues/2> Or you can get
in touch with me (Kathe) and I’ll be happy to wrangle contributions with
a couple of questions. The next step will be to expand and recast the
data description tables (see notes from 10-Feb
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing>
) to capture these descriptions. I plan to duplicate the description
tables from the soil_data_model_survey repository into this new
SOI_harmonizaiton so no need to contribute to those tables directly. And
finally I hope that the thesaurus will link to existing ontologies in
the future (so INSPIRE folks, watch this space!).

If this activity gets traction we’ll talk about how to streamline this
process to get more off-line engagement and start working up scripts to
harmonize the data products using these tables.

Feel free to reply here if I missed anything. In this recap. As always,
detailed notes are in the meeting document
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing>
thanks to our fantastic undergrad scrib this week Lillian Haren! Gary
B-C hit record early in the meeting and that can be found here:
[https://transcripts.gotomeeting.com/#/s/6a14f15fd75e72e0ca6549b99292ae9621a3ad067ab7734845af46ddd7a5c6c7](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=https-3A__transcripts.gotomeeting.com_-23_s_6a14f15fd75e72e0ca6549b99292ae9621a3ad067ab7734845af46ddd7a5c6c7&d=DwMFaQ&c=sJ6xIWYx-zLMB3EPkvcnVg&r=iJTBKCNt7bvRum4dQscVk_YiuzVg3O7ttPMzrksrQc0&m=gxrqG6JqEh-a4rgbgwk_bRO2tBOGLsRfDjBlox6nqOE&s=Shf1bVvHNfMRanjPnuVewQTnj7g9VklPHU1WtVgmmZE&e=)

Our next meeting is **24-Feb at 2300UTC** and we’ll recap where things
sit with this activity.

-Kathe

Agenda  
Lead: Kathe Todd-Brown

- Introductions and roll call  
- 5 minutes to read/digest summary below  
- Feedback for plan  
- Action items for next meeting

Below is a summary of what I’m (Kathe) hearing the group talk around.
Please feel free to contribute/improve on any of these topics:

- Problem space
  - Data providers describing their data need highly detailed and
    precise language (generally big labs, but definite use-case for
    small PI)  
  - Data harmonization need linkages to more general terms to bridge the
    gap in method documentation in data rescue/recovery  
- Possible use cases - merge soil data
  - Align major vocabularies in CSIRO, NRCS, GSP,
    [INSPIRE](https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/Themes/127/2892), LTER, and
    other major labs.
    1.  GACS Core has Global Agricultural Concept Space core concepts  
  - Align individual-PI soil data registered on repositories.  
- Playing Go-Fish
  - Pick a data ‘type’ as a group
    1.  Space-time location of soil sample  
    2.  Bulk density  
    3.  Organic carbon fraction and K-sat  
  - Pick a data set as individuals
    1.  Major Lab data products: NRCS, CSIRO, LUCAS, BioSoil others
        (global: ISRIC/WoSIS/SOTER?)  
    2.  Community data products: ISCN, ISRAD and others  
    3.  Individual researcher data: Top hits on DataOne or personal
        favorites  
  - Describe and compare the data set on call (or off-line
    contributions)
    1.  Data model:
        <https://github.com/ESIPFed/soil_data_model_survey/blob/master/data/data_structure.csv>
        - Add column description  
        - TODO: how to describe long data table  
    2.  Meta data (needs control vocabulary added to it?):
        <https://github.com/ESIPFed/soil_data_model_survey/blob/master/data/data_meta.csv>
        - Add type for keeping in human descriptions  
        - Needs control vocabulary strategy  
    3.  Thesaurus:
        <https://github.com/ESIPFed/soil_data_model_survey/blob/master/data/thesaurus.csv>  
- Map the data models
  - Can we match the data with an existing ontology or do we need to
    modify something?  
  - Add these to the Thesaurus  
- Merge the data scripts
  - Can we design general scripts to merge the data descriptions (ala
    SoDaH and SOC-DRaH)?  
- Timelines
  - Feb-April: Go-Fish and Map for 3 data types  
  - Summer: Scripted data merge based on maps

Notes -

Apology: Megan Wong (CeRDI) - happy to contribute user cases from our DB
as we can (as helpful). DB underpins various platforms (famer group,
catchment level focus) for e.g. <https://data.soilcrc.com.au/map/about>
. Will touch base offline w Kathe to see how we can contribute to gitHub
docs

**Meeting Notes -**

- **Group read notes summary above and discussed**
  - **Gary Recorded**  
- GSP-GLOSIS/INSPIRE: Different in their models
  - trying to make making as easy as possible  
  - have the same codelist basis  
  - INSPIRE links: INSPIRE website / knowledge base:
    <https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/> INSPIRE Community Forum / Thematic
    Clusters: <https://themes.jrc.ec.europa.eu/>  
  - Good practises, implementation examples:
    <https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/inspire-tools>  
  - INSPIRE Soil: <https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/Themes/127/2892>  
- Other vocabularies that we should look at in South American, African,
  or Chinese? (Kathe)
  - Look at what was published, we think it is good to keep what we have
    because we have professionals in the field in the group  
  - Vocabulary in French from Christine Le Bas: discussed vocabularies
    in different languages other than english  
  - Gary in the chat brought up LTER which includes controlled
    vocabulary and AGROVOC (Agronomy Ontology) which includes
    farming/agricultural vocabulary.  
  - Biosoil - Forest/Biosoil Data that Christine Le Bas worked on.  
- Keep focus on soil data
  - Not just listing existing vocabularies and merging them
    - Fall down a rabbit hole of which concepts connect and which
      don’t  
  - Focus on looking at datasets and seeing what we need to describe
    them.  
  - Proposing Go Fish! Method that has been used in Kathe’s lab
    discussed above
    - Kathe will draft up project management  
- Talking about the tables in the summary
  - The group is talking about better description, only original
    provided definition in the metadata that was taken from the original
    data
    - Want flushed out descriptions in the data structure table  
  - Methods need to be better determined  
  - Long vs. Wide data tables, how to describe both?
    - Kathe will add the example of the long data table currently in
      harmonized tables above  
    - Margaret O’Brien has code that can show us visualizations  
  - Human descriptions to be added into the metadata. Have it connected
    to the dataset.
    - Not everything can/should be translate into machine readable at
      the beginning of the project  
  - Everyone would like a constructed workflow on the individual action
    items they will be working on
    - Everyone appreciated the organization of Kathe’s process  
  - Not creating a ontology from scratch, trying to recruit existing
    ontologists
    - Hopefully we can connect/build off wosis or Inspire  
    - Glosis had a hard time keeping people on project for long enough
      to contribute. Engagement is hard.  
    - Glosis implementation, don’t want to be tied to one
      implementation.
      - Want to be aligned with glosis  
      - Mapping

## 24 February 2021 2300 UTC

Recap: We had a fantastic group of nine folks call in for this meeting.
Kathe walked through the data descriptors on
[https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization](https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization/issues/1).
Mark S pointed out that a public URI should really be linked in the
‘thesaurus’ portion of the data descriptors (but I’m not quite sure I
understood your point correctly here so please feel free to
clarify/correct me). There was some back and forth on the specificity of
the column names vs method descriptions that will be fun to continue to
untangle in later conversations. How sampling and processing fit into
these data descriptions and when we need to address them in the
harmonization process is still an open issue.

Independent of these data descriptors, we are starting to collect
representations of sample location, organic carbon, bulk density, and
hydrologic connectivity in the Issues here:
<https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization/issues> We talked fairly
extensively about what should be included in the location identification
and horizon designation was proposed as a possible addition. If you work
with a specific data product please feel free to add your descriptions.
After we have 4-6 descriptions collected we’ll take a look at specific
ontologies associated with individual measurements and see what needs to
be extended to describe the data holdings.

Our next meeting is 10 March 2021 at 1700 UTC and will be a community
presentation by Emilio Mayorga. Stay tuned for details!

Recording:
[https://transcripts.gotomeeting.com/#/s/3bb110233b7b0903261df52df0f482dc45edbea5077b79d6e107bf95313db9e3](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=https-3A__transcripts.gotomeeting.com_-23_s_3bb110233b7b0903261df52df0f482dc45edbea5077b79d6e107bf95313db9e3&d=DwMFaQ&c=sJ6xIWYx-zLMB3EPkvcnVg&r=cG4e22DhE_24WgV67TY07bX35Pu84XKMIq_1hkQnll4&m=_OluMT1wNm1hSEzO8EVtV9HrNWOPTAkJB26xtdZo-3Q&s=Dlg4oym_NagJ9ugq03L1cBpoINteNTwP1e62JgHyke4&e=)

Lead: Kathe Todd-Brown

- Recap status of layer location in data sets  
- Set up description tables:
  [https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization](https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization/issues/1)

Notes:

- Need to determine what we want our focus / next steps to be  
- Feedback on 3 data-table descriptors
  (<https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization>)
  - When looking at examples of a data point
    - The zero-depth
      - Something that isn’t shared across databases  
      - Is this the surface or the organic contact  
      - Need to specify this  
    - The dates themselves
      - Encourage geo first
        - Sorting  
        - Complete communication with EU and US  
    - More than one special geolocation
      - Throw them all in there  
      - We want to show how each dataset represents it
        - Collect the diverse extent of the different types of
          structures  
  - With the current approach, trying to describe aspects of a
    normalized database
    - Might be good for ISCN3
      - Mark is starting with a wide table and got rid of all the
        complexities and denormalized everything (SERGO)
        - Usually what the scientist wants  
        - Semantic contents of the columns and don’t have to worry about
          the tables  
        - Focused on measurements
          - There are existing ontologies for site and latitude  
          - Thinks we should focus on the nitty gritty  
    - Variable location
      - Wide and long tables  
      - Don’t know if this is the right approach but this is the first
        stab  
  - Start off with bulk density or put everything in?
    - Location, observation time (standards have already been developed
      so we need to pick with is most robust), depth, sample
      aggregation, bulk density, organic carbon fraction, KSAT  
- Put in the use cases with the above descriptors and a snapshot  
- New issue with bulk density, organic carbon fraction, KSAT examples  
- Excel was selected because this is what ISCN used
  - Showing eccentricities within a big database  
- Goals
  - Would like to pull analogous columns from Kellog and SoDah
    - Get a collection of half a dozen datasets and compare how they use
      these descriptors  
    - Reply to the issue to add them  
  - Would like to have the tables generated with the data providers
    - Hesitant to have an ID instead of a label  
  - Would like to substitute the variable column for an ontology  
  - Dr. TB goal is to point a script to a download location, automate
    the transfer to rename the columns, change the units, etc
    - Would have to rename the columns if we dropped the tables because
      columns that are named the same are different across tables  
- Mark wants to add a URI column
  - Dr. TB sees this as a second step once we have everything described
    would be to construct some sort of relational ontology  
- Variable column is a local internal standard then we can match it to
  an external one  
- First activity is pulling everything to do with bulk density or
  organic carbon fraction  
- Are you interested in capturing profile descriptions or headons
  - Yes, simon has talked at great lengths or horizon standardization  
  - Leave horizon descriptors untouched for now but not only focusing on
    organic layers  
- Is a horizon descriptor part of geo-location for a sample?
  - Depth is considered to be part of it  
  - Physiographic location was not included in the ISCN example
    - There could be an argument to include it because not all samples
      have lat/long  
- Need top-depth, bottom-depth?
  - Some have midpoints
    - There’s some math you can do to back out of this  
- Ontology for soil sampling protocols?
  - Could we do a little of this and a bit of the bulk density, OC
    percentage, KSAT  
  - Setting up a separate table that summarizes all of this?
    - Build a dictionary for that  
  - The sampling scheme would be described in the data_meta table  
  - Is this a critical first step or can it be left on the table?  
- Next call is a presentation

## 10 March 2021 1700 UTC

**Recap**:  
Hello wordy soils folks! Very brief recap today Emilio Mayorga gave an
amazing overview of work he’s done with the CZIMEA a project associated
with EarthCube and the CZOs. I personally am hoping that he decides to
stick around the cluster a bit because it looks like very similar issues
to what we are hoping to tackle!

I will add the link to the zoom recording to the meeting notes
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing>
when it becomes available and please go to the meeting notes to see the
abstract, notes, and reference links from the talk.

Our next meeting is **24 March 2021 at 2300 UTC**. This will be a
working meeting where we will review data models identified on the new
git repository <https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization/issues>

See you then!  
-Kathe T-B

“Cross-Site Soil and Microbial Ecology Cyberinfrastructure for the
CZIMEA EarthCube Project” Emilio Mayorga (Applied Physics Laboratory,
University of Washington)

**Abstract:** The CZIMEA (Critical Zone Integrative Microbial Ecology
Activity, 2015-2020,
[https://github.com/BiG-CZ/CZIMEA/](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=https-3A__github.com_BiG-2DCZ_CZIMEA_&d=DwMFaQ&c=sJ6xIWYx-zLMB3EPkvcnVg&r=cG4e22DhE_24WgV67TY07bX35Pu84XKMIq_1hkQnll4&m=ldnElUB1ct9SEoX3q8HayXcGg6L_Tz8qpcM3_4aua7k&s=J7rB-0XpgfLK-6GdP2_UmBiPXDGq-Y5-tis8-BTs5nk&e=))
EarthCube Integrative Activities project carried out a cross-site soil
sampling and analysis research activity involving many universities
affiliated with the 10 Critical Zone Observatories (CZO) across the US.
The scientific goal was to gain insights into the differences between
soil microbial communities as they vary across ecosystems and with depth
along a profile, using a wide range of soil and environmental
measurements and both metagenomic and amplicon high-throughput
sequencing to analyze nearly 200 unique soil samples.

Cyberinfrastructure and interoperability were important components of
this EarthCube project. To facilitate management, integration and
dissemination of the cross-site metadata and data generated by CZIMEA,
we set a goal to store information using the Observations Data Model 2
(ODM2,
[http://www.odm2.org](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__www.odm2.org&d=DwMFaQ&c=sJ6xIWYx-zLMB3EPkvcnVg&r=cG4e22DhE_24WgV67TY07bX35Pu84XKMIq_1hkQnll4&m=ldnElUB1ct9SEoX3q8HayXcGg6L_Tz8qpcM3_4aua7k&s=kD3TDxCckokpYRp1bs-MCWoSlIidfBm92OGGYt84SiU&e=))
system with the CZ-Admin User Interface
([http://odm2.github.io/CZ-Manager/](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__odm2.github.io_CZ-2DManager_&d=DwMFaQ&c=sJ6xIWYx-zLMB3EPkvcnVg&r=cG4e22DhE_24WgV67TY07bX35Pu84XKMIq_1hkQnll4&m=ldnElUB1ct9SEoX3q8HayXcGg6L_Tz8qpcM3_4aua7k&s=l8D9M8yVEA8od9kbEnazl_IWshsV_yHHifb12Dl0azQ&e=)),
deployed on the cloud. ODM2 is enriched with cross-linkage to external
data systems using universal identifiers that include DOI’s, ORCID’s and
IGSN’s, in addition to ODM2-managed controlled vocabularies described
online
([http://vocabulary.odm2.org](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__vocabulary.odm2.org&d=DwMFaQ&c=sJ6xIWYx-zLMB3EPkvcnVg&r=cG4e22DhE_24WgV67TY07bX35Pu84XKMIq_1hkQnll4&m=ldnElUB1ct9SEoX3q8HayXcGg6L_Tz8qpcM3_4aua7k&s=w8imTSROov4ZSEBiQhLAab83_RDr765v3AJXi8PvnCg&e=)).
The CZIMEA ODM2 relational database holds extensive, structured sampling
and sample metadata, and initial steps were taken to store environmental
measurement results as well, including soil moisture, field capacity,
texture, carbon and nitrogen content and pH. The plan was to use
universal identifiers to link to genomic results stored externally in
dedicated systems, particularly the MG-RAST metagenomics analysis
server. We also developed the initial elements for storing landscape
information derived from continental scale geospatial datasets,
including site climatologies, land cover type, soil types, and terrain
properties.

I will describe the architecture we developed, progress made and
challenges encountered, hopefully illuminating common challenges and
opportunities in soil informatics.

**Notes**

- Recording the presentation to the cloud  
- Broad announcements
  - ESIP summer meeting will be virtual July 19th - 23rd  
  - Call for sessions will be coming out soon  
- Data we’re working with/new git repository
  - Collecting new data products and giving example of structure
    - Goal: start to put in existing ontology or going to a place like
      ENVO(sp?)  
    - Interested in bulk density, location data…  
    - If you have datasets you would like to contribute, drop a link
      into the github
      - Datasets should have the doi already
        - Not looking to publish new data  
      - Focus first on point data
        - Model data is not focus  
      - Lean towards publicly available data  
    - What is the structure of your data model?  
    - Send an email if github clarification is needed  
- Presentation
  - Goal: serve as an interesting case study  
  - Emilio Mayorga
    - Research Scientist at UWashington  
    - Work primarily around environmental data
      - Ranging from marine to freshwater applications  
    - Background in biogeochemistry  
  - EarthCube
    - Has been going on for 10 years  
    - Is not one system, a community around cyberinfrastructure  
    - Aimed to deploy a general cyberinfrastructure  
    - Interconnect information across systems  
  - Project
    - Objectives
      - Enable Critical Zone to use Earth Cube software  
      - Facilitate cross critical zone project comparison  
    - 10 Critical Zone sites
      - Focused on microbial ecology drivers and diversity  
      - Has produced two integrated papers  
    - ODM2
      - ODM1 was focused on time series data and didn’t have much
        sophistication
        - ODM2 added sampling data capabilities  
      - Helped build partnerships  
      - Appropriate for budget  
    - Walkthrough of CZIMEA ODM2 Admin
      - Not public access, requires login information  
      - Shows Methods and their types  
      - Ability to plot data  
      - Not much data to plot, so just showed map interface  
    - Older versions of code on the website, not the most recent
      versions  
    - Challenges
      - Group passed limited funding and had turnover, making it
        difficult to complete  
      - Dataset was not hoped for finished project  
      - Were at the cusp of exploring linkages across systems  
    - Q/A or comments
      - Did you extend any \_\_\_ to vocabulary registry
        - No, used in a particular way  
      - Given what you know now with the project over, I have a student
        who wants to publish soil corps data, where would you suggest
        she do it so that interface can be seen forever?
        - At least in context of US, there is no ideal repository for
          soil data  
        - EDI comes to mind, haven’t worked with directly
          - Looking for format presently  
        - QUASI is playing a central role in sharing data

Next Meeting is on 24th in working group meetings

## 24 March 2021 2300 UTC

**Recap**:

Small but dedicated turnout today! Between the time change, stale links,
and conflicting ESIP calendar we only had a few of us call in today.
Tanja W brought up the importance of capturing the structure/design of
the soil sampling which led to an extensive discussion about landscapes
and landforms with David W and Irfad A.

There hasn’t been much contribution to the GitHub page:
https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization/issues (Thank you Steven E
who has contributed!). I worry that we are starting to run the risk of
spinning our wheels a little on this project. Not sure that we have a
way through this yet but first step is recognizing the issue. Thoughts
and feedback here are welcome (either in this email thread or to me
directly). I can continue to add more datasets to the repository but if
folks are finding this difficult to use we can continue to try something
else.

Our next call is at 1700 UTC on April 7th! We’ll be hearing from Kathi
Schleidt and Tomáš Řezník - GloSIS, INSPIRE, and ISO 28258 more details
to follow next week!

No meeting recording today but as always the notes and call in
information is on the meeting notes here:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing

**Agenda**

- Introductions and agenda additions
  - Roll call and introductions at the bottom  
- Summer ESIP meeting
  - Do we want to submit a proposal? Or something else?  
- Review data models on
  <https://github.com/ESIPFed/SOI_harmonization/issues>
  - Not much on here, why and what needs to change?  
- How are we going to map to semantic resources?

**NOTES**

- Summer ESIP meeting and USGI meeting occurring at the same time  
- Review data sets
  - What does this process/roadmap look like?  
- Introductions
  - Irfan Ainuddin- Research in creating app that looks at soil data,
    working with surveying  
  - Kathe Todd-Brown- Background in math, but currently works in soil
    informatics  
  - Tanja Williamson- Works mostly with land use  
  - Stevan Earl- Information manager, economists by training; wants to
    work on describing soil  
- Change ESIP calendar to match with meeting time  
- Sierra dataset has more complete ontologies and has more complete
  information
  - Go through how the profile collections are structured  
  - Has information about items not in SSURGO
    - Working in SSURGO not ideal for working with profile level data  
- Structure of common positions information is just as important as soil
  profile
  - SSURGO has vocabulary for this, but commonly not used  
- Are landscape positions standardized?
  - Don’t know, but positions of interests are normally uniform
    - Convex/concave  
- APQ
  - Shares aspects with KSL language  
  - Bulk density shows up at DB (density bulk)  
- Do we break it up or describe all data structures as a whole?
  - Soil profile collections may help with that  
  - Start with US profile data instead of trying to piecemeal without
    context  
  - Not found a good way to integrate landscape systems  
- ISCN did not have hierarchical terminology, which created confusion  
- On GitHub, reply to issues by logging in and treat as conversation
  thread  
- Soil survey description
  - Has a hierarchy with glossary and written documentation, but not
    policed  
  - Has landscape levels, 3 dimensional descriptors, and landforms names
    - Can not use a term twice  
  - May not be populated  
  - Not standardized
    - EX Austrialians have their own terminology with overlaps  
- Create a issue to discuss hierarchy of terminology and documented
  definitions on GitHub
  - Currently, no standard conventions of GitHub issues  
- Best way to move forwards in ontology developments?
  - Two parallel projects
    - Mark’s project focused on working with SSURGO data points, but
      doesn’t work with data descriptors  
    - This project which focuses of descriptions, terminology, and
      pedon  
  - Two projects come together in SSURGO through connections between
    pedon and soil mapping data
    - Reach out to Mark who is currently working on C horizon data  
  - Bridge NRC data from Mark to GloSIS  
  - Talk to speakers about upcoming issues  
  - Scale relationship between map units and pedon
    - Map units contain many locations, but pedon you can focus more on
      specific areas  
  - What is pedon?
    - Pit size, generally a meter^2  
    - In AQP, there is information about the relationships between
      descriptors and pedons  
    - Slash may indicate a hierarchy  
  - Meeting in two weeks to discuss GloSIS at an earlier time

## 7 April 2021 1700 UTC

Recap:

We had an amazing turn out (22 folks logged on at our peak) with many
new faces for a presentation by Kathi Schleidt and Tomáš Řezník on
GloSIS soil data model. It was a fantastic deep dive into the details
behind the GloSIS mandate, various decisions and compromises made along
the way, as well as the current status of the project. So much ground
was covered during this presentation that I would encourage you to take
a look at their outline on the google doc
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing>
and watch the video here: <https://youtu.be/FsfTiCLEKF0> I have a
feeling this will not be the only time we discuss GloSIS!

Key reference links from the chat:

- https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis​  
- https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/​  
- https://www.ogc.org/standards/om

If anyone wanted to follow up directly with Kathi or Tomas ~~I’ve cc’ed
them on this emai~~l \[Kathi Schleidt ; Tomáš Řezník \].

Update on the ESIP Calendar, the Zoom room scheduling is not playing
nicely with our two timeslots and it’s propagated to issues with the
ESIP Calendar. Currently looking at possible solutions to smooth over
the issues. As always I’ll keep the link on the google doc as our master
‘truth’.

Agenda:

- Please add your name to the roll call above and if you are new drop an
  introduction at the bottom of the document  
- Goals of the cluster
  - “The mission of Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster is to connect
    the soils research community to informatics tools for better
    research.”  
  - “We will do this by 1) promoting research exchange between the
    informatics and soil science community, 2) creating how-to resources
    for soil data harmonization, and 3) targeted development of semantic
    resources such as ontologies and other informatics tools for soil
    science.”  
- Presentation (See below)

Presentation from Kathi Schleidt and Tomáš Řezník

**Soil properties modelling for Global Soil Information System
(GloSIS)**  
**Leveraging existing standardized models**

- GloSIS introduction, requirements and use cases  
- Status quo of soil properties modelling
  - *List of models analysed*  
  - *Focus on ISO 28258 and INSPIRE*  
- What is “interoperability” under European INSPIRE SDI perspective
  vs. exchange harmonized parameters following an agreed domain-specific
  nomenclature?
  - *General INSPIRE*  
  - *Emergence of ISO 28258 from INSPIRE*  
- GloSIS data model:
  - *Class diagrams detailing relevant spatial classes including
    observations thereon*  
  - *Additional UML structures to encapsulate the explicit requirements
    ensuing from GloSIS*  
  - *Transformation to semantic structure*  
- GloSIS data modelling outputs: UML class diagrams, codelists, XML
  schema, TTLs  
- Governance - Data Provision Options
  - *Codelist registries (include cascade down to regional codelists)*  
  - *Data licencing*  
  - *Web services/Provision tools (potential for utilizing common
    tools)*  
- Data ingestion - import to central GloSIS repository for further
  analysis  
- Open issues:
  - *Raster formats*  
  - *Serialization and provision options*  
- Conclusions

Question: Does the model us to ask and answer questions about the
properties of soil layers? For example, does the model structure data so
we can ask of a particular type of soil, “Show we all the places where
Project A found in 2010 a sub-soil layer with a porosity between x and
y.”

## 21 April 2021 2300 UTC

Recap:  
Greetings ESIP Soils folks!

We had about 6 folks join us for a spirited discussion of the different
projects that conversations that have been going on in the cluster over
the last several months. We can pat ourselves on the back that we’ve
gathered some very impressive international collection of how soil data
is being worked with and described across a wide range of projects.

Particularly useful for me was to get my head around skos
(term-definition pairs) and rdf (richer relationship descriptions). Just
to state the obvious here skos are easier to set up and easier to sell
as an initial scope of work, where as a richer rdf/owl is a longer
commitment and harder to sell without a demonstrated need (ie do the
skos and then you demonstrate the need for the rdf/owl). I’m sure there
are still things wrong there but it seems like a good start.

Brandon uncovered a really interesting vocabulary here
[https://www.soils.org/publications/soils-glossary/#](https://www.soils.org/publications/soils-glossary/)
and Emilio M dropped a link to a new data paper on ksat here:
<https://essd.copernicus.org/articles/13/1593/2021/>. Tanja and Irfan
reminded folks that AQP might be another really good resource to keep in
mind <http://ncss-tech.github.io/AQP/> for future works. I’m reaching
out to some of the folks I know in sssa to figure out how the soils
glossary is currently licensed and maybe collaborate in extending it.

I put in an ESIP proposal to talk about some of the work that a NASEM
workshop I was involved with and since it’s related to the work done in
this cluster I figured we could shamelessly merge the two. I’m still
working out what exactly that will look like but it will probably be
some combination of a summary of the data products covered in the NASEM
listening sessions with the community presentations we’ve heard here in
the cluster. Merged with a bit of a brainstorm on next steps for moving
towards better semantic tools for soils.

Some logistics, for various reasons we need to set up two zoom rooms for
the different meeting times. I’ve updated the google doc with the two
links and these should line up with the ESIP calendar now. Please be
sure to update any calendar reminders you might have set up. For those
of you who want calendar invites, the google doc now has links to
invites you can download!

As always here is the google doc:
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing>

Our next presentation will be 1700 UTC on the 5th of May. Raul Palma
from Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center will be speaking a bit
more about GLOSIS. See you then!

-Kathe

Agenda:

- Cluster logistics, revisit pending topics
  - <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wyplA7K7IHIY_yPXTydfFYNTwiXyrZY2R_9lu3LjRhk/edit?usp=sharing>  
  - We had three deliverables, two are relevant right now. How are we
    doing?
    - Community presentations “we can stand up 12 calls in the first
      year with at least 20 researchers attending and generate quarterly
      outputs summarizing these presentations.” - yes we do this well
      :D  
    - Ontology/vocabulary work: “To have a successful cluster, we will
      develop an ontology or identify an existing ontology to describe
      the top 10% of soil metrics reported in at least 10 distinct and
      varied data sets each covering \>500 sample sites by the end of
      our first year.”  
- ESIP summer meeting
  - Session proposals:
    <https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1T9hKbFIzcSIgMpvzfgTnqmUvf-8nTrZmVbAn1aB9G-Q/edit?usp=sharing>  
  - Potential SWEET integration? Mark S says yes!  
- Sierra Navada algorithms, quantitative methods, and pedology - CR
  Transects  
- <https://www.soils.org/publications/soils-glossary/#> - Brendon might
  skos-ify this list

## 5 May 2021 1700 UTC

Recap:

Thank you Raul for a fantastic overview of the GloSIS ontology. If you
missed it you can find the recording here:
<https://youtu.be/q79p_oA5rtU> and Anne D took fantastic notes in the
logistics document.

Brief housekeeping: We now have ONE zoom room for both meetings and the
easy and convenient calendar generating links might not auto update.
Sorry that this information keeps changing, please double check your
calendar to make sure it matches the information on the google document
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing>

We will be meeting next on 19 May at 2300UTC. If no one comes forward
with a different suggestion, on the agenda will be pulling together a
soil semantic resource list for the ESIP Summer meeting (and
ourselves!).

We are looking for other presentations! If you know of anyone working
with soil data who would be interested in presenting please send them my
way!

-Kathe

Presentation from Raul Palma - Poznan Supercomputing and Networking
Center -

GloSIS Ontology Overview

Abstract/outline: The presentation will provide an overview of the
process for transforming the Glosis UML data model into an OWL ontology.
The transformation was carried out semi-automatically, following best
practices in ontology engineering, reusing whenever possible existing
standard ontologies and vocabularies. The presentation will also provide
an overview on how the ontology is being used as the underlying model to
generate Linked Data from soil databases, which can then be easily
connected to other existing and related datasets in the Linked Open Data
Cloud.

Recording: <https://youtu.be/q79p_oA5rtU>

Agenda:

- Housekeeping
  - Roll call and introductions  
  - YouTube channel:
    <https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5_i8iJW_fzrdsUBR6cBs3LT5Tz>  
  - Summer meeting session outline
    - 5 minutes - Welcome and purpose  
    - 10 - **Interoperability dreams:** FAO GLOSIS overview \[Fenny van
      Edmond\]  
    - 5 - Break out question brainstorming  
    - 10 - **Data access and delivery:** USDA-NRCS data tools \[?pending
      confirmation\]  
    - 5 - Break out question brainstorming  
    - 10 - **Data integration:** New Zealand ag soil data \[Megan
      Wong\]  
    - 5 - Break out question brainstorming  
    - 5 - *Break \[moderator curate/synthesize questions\]*  
    - 25 - Moderated panel discussion - fishbowl  
    - 10 - Recap, resources report from the SOI Cluster, and next
      steps  
- Presentation from Raul Palma (recorded)  
- Q&A

Meeting Notes:

- Presentation notes:
  - GloSIS: spatial data infrastructure that bring together soil
    information collected by national institutions
    - Interconnecting 340 soil properties in a model structure  
    - Implemented as UML data model, indicating spatial object types and
      various observations gathered from soil sampling  
    - GloSIS defines 9 spatial object types  
    - Container classes defined to groups relevant for a specific
      spatial object type  
    - SIEUSOIL is implementing an observatory platform that will provide
      Open Linked Data
      - Linked data improves accessibility and improves information
        integration  
      - Allows for increased use of data through links and inferencing  
      - Linked data defines the principles and technologies that will be
        used to represent data  
      - GloSIS assists in data modeling  
  - Transform GloSIS data model into ontologies through a semi automatic
    process through processing (alignment with SOSA/SSN) and defining
    code lists  
  - Spatial types and “container class” modeled as OWL classes  
  - Post processing: container classes removed; properties were
    transformed and aligned to SOSA/SSN, yielding five different
    property types  
  - Container classes were restricted using owl properties
    - First restriction was uniform across subclasses: connected
      sub-class to associated spatial object  
    - Second: represented differently based on result type, which are
      string values, code list values, and numeric values
      - Code: link auxiliary class with code list values, then model
        codelist with a class and a concept scheme
        - Each codelist value modeled as an individual and a concept
          scheme  
    - Third: linking observation wit observed property (few cases of
      link to code lists)  
  - Spatial features were aligned with the existing ISO/TC 211 Standard
    ontologies
    - Additional tools were created to introduce ISO features  
  - Ontology check for consistency allowed for emergence of typos and
    other simple errors  
  - Final ontology is published with persistent identifiers and includes
    five main modules with separate code list module, common module, the
    main ontology, and can add additional lists if desired  
  - Linked data publication pipelines implemented to create linked data:
    take data sources and integrate them into a common ontology using
    GloSIS
    - Possibility to use existing pipelines but room to customize if
      desired  
- Discussion:
  - There is a way to evaluate you are complying with the model  
  - Kathe Todd Brown asked how do you break out method procedure from
    lab procedure?
    - GloSIS asks what is the associated procedure  
    - Different codelists from type of values to type of procedures used
      to generate values  
  - Is there a way to represent the hierarchy of how a sample is drawn
    and processed or lumped into a general procedure?
    - According to model, way to model methodology and samples in
      similar ways, but don’t have this yet in UML GloSIS ontology  
    - Sample treatment up until now hasn’t been considered yet, what has
      been considered so far is procedure (ex. pH) - Luis de Sousa  
  - GloSIS is a continuous and collaborative project  
  - Mark Schildhauer: discussed use cases previously, are the
    observations integrated yet into the ontology, and how are the
    subclasses defined as of now? (without definition possible to have
    confusion)
    - Going in the direction of the principles of linked open data,
      using W3ID GloSIS ontology, working towards referencing ontology
      as well as referencing terms  
  - Is linework envisioned to be able to be sorted using case specific
    results from multiple datasets?
    - Once able to represent multiple datasets using GloSIS, will be
      able to respond to these kinds of queries; need to define most
      common use cases first  
    - De Sousa- now gathering literature sources to backup various
      procedures referenced; generating eventually a hub that will
      compile federation (will take time to generate answers)  
  - One one hand can take guidelines as basis, but the guidelines are
    not entirely consistent and include inconsistencies - Tomas Reznik  
  - The inventory of inconsistencies can be worked through
    collaboratively, including through the scientists who used
    procedures. Europe has more conflicts regarding individual codelists
    based on country classification that will need to be merged - Fenny
    van Egmond  
  - Referencing to crops but no linking to agricultural ontology
    systems; may be useful to link to existing FAO vocabulary-
    Schildhauer  
  - Using domain and range quantifiers and other quantifiers? Yes

## 19 May 2021 2300 UTC

Recap: My apologies for a very late recap of the 19 May meeting. We had
a great conversation last meeting with folks talking about the
difference between ‘A’-assertion and ‘T’-terminology ontologies (notes
on the google doc). And touched briefly on the session proposed for the
summer meeting (remember to registar!).

If you are interested. I’m trying to go through our old notes documents
and compile a summary of soil resources that we’ve talked about.
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing>
Still in progress but I got through some of the early notes and started
generating a resource list. If anything is glaringly missing please feel
free to add to it!

We have a presentation by Kai Blumberg (UArizona) on ENVO and OBO
foundry workflow and tools tomorrow 2 June at 1700 UTC. Hope that you
can make it!

Agenda:

- Roll call  
- Summer meeting session outline
  - 5 minutes - Welcome and purpose  
  - 10 - **Interoperability dreams:** FAO GLOSIS overview \[Fenny van
    Edmond\]  
  - 5 - Break out question brainstorming  
  - 10 - **Data access and delivery:** USDA-NRCS data tools \[Dylan
    Beaudette and Andrew Brown\]  
  - 5 - Break out question brainstorming  
  - 10 - **Data integration:** New Zealand ag soil data \[Megan Wong\]  
  - 5 - Break out question brainstorming  
  - 5 - *Break \[moderator curate/synthesize questions\]*  
  - 25 - Moderated panel discussion - fishbowl  
  - 10 - Recap, resources report from the SOI Cluster, and next steps  
- Review previous meeting notes and aggregation of soil semantic
  resources for ESIP summer meeting
  - List of soil vocabulary lists  
  - List of soil ontologies  
  - Recap of status of soil representation in OBO/ENVO(?)  
  - Status/update
    - GLOSIS  
    - NRCS  
    - CISRO??  
  - 

Notes:

- Introductions  
- Hackathon
  - Registration mandatory, 1-4 hour commitment per week for four
    months  
  - Challenge/Idea: hackathon agrees on definitions and registers
    preliminary definitions  
  - Aiming for soil researchers looking for datasets, will shift
    hackathon to end use thinking  
  - Restor Effort - shared by Rodrigo Vargas
    - <http://www.restor.eco/>  
  - Common question: there is so much research out there, how do we
    harmonize all of this?  
  - It seems some groups are discussing the same points/discussing
    rather than searching for solutions
    - “Everybody is buzzing about FAIR, but are people actually reading
      it front to back?”
      - This paper endorses best practices, a significant nudge in the
        right direction
        - Idea: start with FAIR, then move on  
- Soil changing in the future discussion, started by Bhavna Arora
  - Sounds more like an A box idea, rather than T box  
  - Ontology should be built before the knowledge graph; T box is
    important
    - Science should be able to define, or else ontology won’t be able
      to  
  - T box
    - Terminology
      - Example: Defining amendments  
      - Should have a spreadsheet built that has ultimate definitions
        - Validates agreed upon definitions  
        - Should be linked so it is not lost
          - Struggles: what is part of methodology vs note/annotation or
            treatment
            - When do we spin off a new definition vs when we split off
              into a new definition?  
  - A box
    - Assertions
      - Empirical knowledge, as it builds
        - No longer considered an ontology, considered a knowledge
          graph  
        - Hesitancy: there will be multiple hypotheses for understanding
          soils in systems in an A box format  
    - What should the A box be able to answer?
      - Find samples and their locations
        - Helps if ontology is well defined  
- Compilation
  - List of players
    - Current ontology tools  
    - What are we not seeing in the field  
    - What do we see that we like  
  - Next steps
    - Request for best practice to build ontology taking in all of these
      considerations

## 2 June 2021 1700 UTC

Presentation from Kai Blumberg - University of Arizona, Woodwell Climate
Center - ENVO and OBO foundry workflow and tools
<https://youtu.be/tyJphUcIr1E> with slides
[20210602_ESIP_SOI_Blumberg.pptx](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nrEl1Cc1ElpXnKILUZvZE0LS1MiydMiV/view?usp=sharing)

Recap:  
Greetings wordy soil folks!

We had a great presentation from Kai Blumberg Wednesday 2 June on how to
fit further development of a soil ontology resource into the current
landscape with special attention to how ENVO has incorporated topic
specific ontologies. You can see the full presentation here:
<https://youtu.be/tyJphUcIr1E> and notes are in the google doc here
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing>

As a reminder we are pulling together a list of resources here
(<https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing>)
from earlier cluster presentations for a session at the ESIP summer
meeting
(h[ttps://2021esipsummermeeting.sched.com/info](https://2021esipsummermeeting.sched.com/info))

Our next meeting will be 16 June at 2300 UTC and we’ll be hearing from
Cheryl H. Porter (University of Florida) about work on the Agricultural
Research Data Network: harmonization of agronomic data

Hope to see you there!  
-Kathe

Agenda:

1.  Resource development for ESIP summer meeting:
    <https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing>  
2.  Presentation

Notes:

- Housekeeping - want to compile a 1-2 page of the resources we’ve
  aggregated  
- We have a presentation by Kai Blumberg (UArizona) on ENVO and OBO
  foundry workflow and tools
  - FAIR
    - Data and vocabulary should be accessible to people and machines
      - Findable
        - Terms are found and discovered, with a global unique
          identifier  
      - Accessible
        - Behind a paywall vs. open access  
        - Availability beyond hard copy  
      - Interoperable
        - Metadata using formal but accessible language for knowledge
          representation  
      - Reusability
        - Including more than just labels  
    - OBO
      - Open biological and biomedical ontology foundry and library  
      - Do not reinvent the wheel  
      - Every domain should have people adding relevant inputs  
      - Environment Ontology (ENVO)
        - Good example of FAIR  
      - Ontology Design Patterns
        - Generate ontology classes from csv files
          - Robot templates
            - Guides through the process of creating new terms  
            - Intended for non-ontologists  
          - Dead simple ontology design pattern  
  - Possibilities for soil-info cluster
    - Build a new ontology from scratch (not recommended)
      - Need a URL server  
      - Hard to reuse existing tools  
      - Extra work to make interoperable with existing systems  
    - Working within/into an existing ecosystem (recommended)
      - Fosters FAIR principle  
  - Ontologies that spun off from ENVO
    - Foodon
      - CDN spun off from Foodon  
    - AgrO  
  - Q&A
    - Do you also have a SOSA/SSN compliant template?
      - Some of these tools could be used to create SOSA like
        terminology (robot template)  
    - How to represent things like sample collection/methodological
      differences?
      - This framework (the example provided) is not doing that, but OBI
        does have capability to handle such inputs  
      - Would have to register the methodologies as a device
        - Though only one way to handle this  
    - How do you measure the uptake of the ontologies that get built?
      - People do not always report  
      - Hard to know, actual statistics are hard to know  
      - Google Analytics could be a solution

Discussion afterwards about EnvO model and ROBOT tool

Link to Agriportal that may have vocabs/ontos with useful terms relative
to Land Use:  
<http://agroportal.lirmm.fr/ontologies>

Agmip– <https://agmip.org/>  
for reconciling Ag models, but doesn’t appear to be any “semantic”
approach.

## 16 June 2021 2300 UTC

Recording: <https://youtu.be/tEmmJzmEQ_c>  
Presentation:
[20210616_ESIPSoilOntology_ARDN_intro.pdf](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1_CLfQjEqW27tV2TbVF5s-GDZboi4elfd/view?usp=sharing)

Presentation from Cheryl H. Porter - University of Florida  
Agricultural Research Data Network: Harmonization of Agronomic Data

Abstract: Agricultural research data are valuable resources that are
often lost after the original research objectives are complete. Numerous
datasets have become findable and accessible through data portals such
as CGIAR’s [GARDIAN](https://gardian.bigdata.cgiar.org) and the USDA’s
[Ag Data Commons](https://data.nal.usda.gov/) but many of these legacy
research datasets are difficult for researchers to reuse due to the
diversity of content, vocabularies, units, domains, and schemas.
[ARDN](https://agmip.github.io/ARDN/) provides dataset annotation
protocols that allow quantitative agronomic data to be
machine-interpreted and translated to a common format with a
standardized vocabulary. The original raw dataset, often associated with
a DOI, are maintained without modification but are linked to the new
interoperable data products. Using these data annotation protocols, a
core set of interoperable agronomic data from multiple datasets can be
discovered, harmonized, and aggregated into new data products for
quantitative research including modeling, data analytics, and
meta-analyses.

These ARDN protocols expand upon data interoperability standards
developed as part of the Agricultural Model Intercomparison and
Improvement Project ([AgMIP](https://agmip.org/)) and are being
implemented in Ag Data Commons; GARDIAN Labs as part of the CGIAR’s
Platform for Big Data; and at the International Fertilizer Development
Center ([IFDC](https://ifdc.org/)) as part of their open data efforts.

Notes:

- Pre-presentation discussion:
  - ENVO is the most comprehensive ontology, but has issues on how they
    treat soil  
  - Minimum data principle: You may need to collect some specific data,
    but while you’re out there collect some minimum soil data
    - Soil density and LLI  
  - It’s important to get as many different disciplines in the room and
    getting them connected and working together  
- Announcements:
  - Join Slack channel for reminders!  
- Motivations for ARDN
  - Major gap between potential value of data collected through
    agricultural experiments and the current value obtained with the
    data  
  - Data isn’t typically used beyond its original purpose  
  - Many legacy data sets have a lot of value and could have even more
    value if they were combined across locations, time, genetics, etc.  
  - The goal is to bridge the gap between data supply ( multiple
    datasets, research experiments, farm surveys, government and NGO
    data, etc.) and data demand (modeling , data analytics,
    meta-analysis, cross-domain analyses, etc.)
    - Challenges: Formats, database schemas, locations, vocabularies,
      etc.  
    - Solutions: Annotate data with standard vocabularies, new
      translator for conversions, and additional translators for end
      users  
- ARDN History
  - Started with AgMIP to address global problems (ex: food insecurity)
    - Started using multiple agricultural models to view climate change
      and found that the mean of all of the models is better than any
      individuals model  
  - Worked with CGIARS Big Data Platform to annotate legacy data for
    early annotation protocols  
  - IFCD has now adopted these tools  
- ARDN data characteristics:
  - Point based data
    - Can be collected at any scale  
  - Agronomic research data
    - Field crop experiments  
    - Farm survey data  
  - Methods, protocol, software also have impenetaions in other
    disciplines  
  - Specifically interested in plots of data associated with latitude
    and longitude
    - Can be used with precision data (ideal) or generalizing an entire
      field  
- ARDN annotations
  - Contains core metadata which meets a quality standard, allowing
    datasets to be discovered and access  
  - Sidecar file \#1 allows data comets to be discovered in an automated
    way through the semantic web
    - Dataset variables are mapped to ontologies for meta data  
  - Sidecar file \#2 presents annotated data using AgMIP translators and
    is produced using VMapper
    - Not meant to be human readable, instead meant for computer
      extraction  
  - Sidecar file \#3 creates a road made for searchable data that can be
    used in many different way
    - Contains an indexing section, extracted data section in a tab
      delimited format, and summary statistics  
  - Data is yet to be handled sub daily, but its is something that is
    currently being worked on  
- ARDN data sharing workflow
  - Starts with someone wanting to map data  
  - They use VMapper to annotate data
    - An app developed to take data from CSV and map it to ICASA
      variables  
    - Unit conversion is taken care by VMapper  
    - User can define variables and conversions  
    - Allows multi table relational linkages  
  - ACEB translators turn the data into a ACEB format file, which is
    then translated by AgMIP translators into DSSAT input and more  
  - The interpreted annotation can be used an ontology mappers to form
    semantic linkages  
  - The Sidecar \#3 extraction brings out data subset summary and
    statistics  
- AgMIP data interoperability tools
  - Keeps assumptions differents from the data  
  - Designed to work with inconsistent data sources  
- AgMIP harmonized data format
  - Uses key-value pairs stored in JSON objects
    - JSON is split into soil layer data, initial conditions, weather,
      and other information  
    - Key is ICASA variable
      - ICASA
        - Data dictionary held in a Google Doc
          ([www.tinyurl.com/icasa-mvl](http://www.tinyurl.com/icasa-mvl))  
        - ICASA terms are developed using a modeling perspective  
        - Standards include documentation of environment  
        - Not yet able to ontologize and not yet focused for working on
          microbial data  
        - Working on best way to curate  
  - Non-relational schema works with irregular data from a variety of
    sources  
  - CGIARS works more with ontology and has developed the agronomy
    ontology
    - Works closely with CGIARS to ensure compatibility  
  - Need a lot of variables for the models that are still not well
    categorized in the ontologies  
  - Will soon work to organize a schema  
- Hackathons
  - AgMIP hackathons were held to develop model specific translators and
    were super effective  
  - Crop modelers were paired with programers in order to maximize
    productivity and create a usable translators within a week  
  - 5 multi model development sprints have produced 13 different
    translators for 13 different models  
  - ARDN hackathons are now monthly data sprints (4-5 hours) in an
    online Zoom format
    - 4-5 hour format works much better than a week long Zoom
      conference  
    - Post COVID, weekly Zoom meetings may continue  
  - Everything is open sourced and found on GitHub
    - <https://agmip.github.io/ARDN/>  
    - AgMIP is found on GitHub as well  
    - ICASA is being converted into a GitHub repository

## 30 June 2021 1700 UTC

Coffee chat! No formal agenda. What are you working on?

[Current soil data
landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing)

Notes:

- ESIP summer meeting deadline: July 22nd  
- With soil ontologies right now, new model is taking more shape and
  there is more discussion occurring with how to model procedures
  (categorical properties and list of chemical properties) and entities
  more specifically
  - Units and other factors are being confirmed  
  - Human readable descriptions are being worked on next  
  - Report submitted March 31 (Fenny and Christine)
    - Update on sampling (mainly statistically sampling design) and
      modeling and overview of data available in European countries (not
      complete)  
- (Christine) working on mapping of soil information, waiting on soil
  ontologies
  - Uses ISO system (fenny)  
- (Fenny) many different countries and languages and issues with
  translations is an issue that will need to be addressed, default to
  international standard?  
- (Kathe) would be helpful to map international standards of soil sample
  preparations
  - Harmonized on
    <http://www.fao.org/global-soil-partnership/glosolan/soil-analysis/standard-operating-procedures/en/>
    (fenny)
    - More information will be made available with new editions (next
      few years)  
- (Stevan) works on a soil project focusing on soil carbon data
  - Post doc Derek working on building databases for SODA CZO’s  
- (fenny) there is a world soil congress upcoming next year, working
  group will present on soil data information standards (not distinct to
  GloSIS)  
- (kathe) soil data licensing issues in US soil society, book licensing
  versus ontologies; how to augment ESIP and hackathons with more soil
  scientists?
  - (brian) used to be a group focused on biodiversity data that had
    legal restrictions, might be helpful with insight  
  - (sumeet) group is observing start up activity to guess soil health
    from air (remote sensing), considering stitching together with soil
    data to help satellite data map it  
- (fenny) a project working improving soil organic carbon in topsoil
  from space, results from workshop will come online soon  
- (sumeet) sensor can determine healthy versus unhealthy soil structure
  - (kathe) challenge is soil is deep, and scanning only can measure top
    easily  
- One more meeting before esip

## ~~14 July 2021 2300 UTC~~

~~Casual chat~~

## ~~28 July 2021 1700 UTC~~

ESIP summer meeting, no cluster call

## 11 August 2021 2300 UTC

Purpose: *Recap first year and plan for next year*

1.  [ESIP Soil Ontology and Informatics Clustering
    proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wyplA7K7IHIY_yPXTydfFYNTwiXyrZY2R_9lu3LjRhk/edit?usp=sharing)  
2.  What was done by the numbers:
    1.  Number of cluster calls with average number of attendees \[95/12
        = 2021 and 134/10 = 2020 ~ 10.5 folks per call\]  
    2.  YouTube count: between 15-50 views on 6 recordings  
    3.  Harmonized datasets: 0  
3.  What do we want to do?
    1.  Calls/presentations
        1.  who coordinates  
        2.  Who wants to present?  
    2.  Hackathons
        1.  Temporal-geolocation; sampling design; organic carbon
            fraction; texture; elemental analysis; available nutrients;
            soil respiration; experimental design; microbial biomass;
            enzyme activity assays;  
    3.  Possible future ENVO soil ontology?

Recap:  
We revisited some of the metrics for the cluster proposal ([ESIP Soil
Ontology and Informatics Clustering
proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wyplA7K7IHIY_yPXTydfFYNTwiXyrZY2R_9lu3LjRhk/edit?usp=sharing))
and in general it was a very successful first year! We hosted 22 cluster
meetings over the past year and had an average of 10.5 folks per
meeting, which makes us one of the more active clusters from what I’ve
heard. We have a new YouTube channel with 6 presentations on it and
between 15-50 views each, not going to break any records here but I’m
quite comfortable with this presence (also points for amusing faces on
opening shots). We completely flubbed our harmonization goal this year,
which in retrospect was extremely ambitious. But we will fix this!  
There was a lot of interest in this call in taking some data (soil pH in
particular) and annotating it with several existing ontologies in an
effort to 1) teach us poor domain researchers how to do such a thing,
and 2) identify the gaps and possible opportunities across these
ontologies. Some ontologies that were listed were GLOSIS, ODM, SOSA +
SSN, ENVO, and AGRO. I will work up a draft of an announcement and
design for a series of working meetings in October with a goal of having
this live in September.  
I gave a short report-out from the first ‘hackathon’ that I held this
summer to kick around a community-produced soil ontology seed. We came
up with <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/CoSoDat> which focuses on a
heiractical method descriptions within some value-unit-method and
input-parameter-function tuples. Bulk density is fairly complete
according to the group and dozen or so datasets we tested it against.  
Both the ontology mapping and CoSoDat are seed work for a possible ENVO
soil slice at some point in the future. Both activities are geared
towards developing a core group of collaborative researchers in both
soils and informatics who could provide substantive contributions to
these semantic resources.  
**Next steps:** Expect a draft in the next week on the soil pH hackathon
that will be open for comments. If you have someone you think would be
interesting to hear an update on their soil data project, feel free to
snag one of the open spots this fall on the meetings document:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing

Best,  
-Kathe

## 25 August 2021 1700 UTC

Flow:

- Cluster announcements:
  - Planning October hackathon pH!
    [BoisterousBeetles_planning](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Tg6TBSqYtcCoepjywWo0_aQQFT8A3xes1jMONBWvFEA/edit?usp=sharing)  
- Presentation from Melisa Cragin

**Title:** “Preparing for new Federal guidelines on data publishing:
Evolving Federal initiatives and the NSF Public Access Repository.”

**Abstract:** Research data and code are fundamental to scientific
review processes, claim verification, and the production of new
knowledge. Increasingly, these products are viewed as first class
research objects that are integral to community expectations about
publishing and public access. Given this, we can anticipate that
improving public access to the results of federally-funded research will
mean the expansion of reporting by grant recipients to include records
about research datasets that underly publications. This will necessitate
the selection of a repository and acquisition of Digital Object
Identifiers (DOIs) for these data, and submission of a metadata record
for into a public records system. Federal requirements on Public Access
include, “making copies of articles in peer-reviewed scholarly journals
and juried conference papers” within 12 months of publication. The NSF
Public Access Repository was designed to meet this aim for NSF awardees,
and it is anticipated that the scope will be extended to data resulting
from NSF funding. I will give a short presentation on the NSF Public
Access Plan and PAR, to be followed by an extended discussion on
community readiness for these likely new guidelines. This work is part
of an NSF EAGER project, “Amplifying Community Readiness to Increase
Public Access to Data.”

**Bio:** Melissa Cragin is Chief Strategist for Data Initiatives in the
Research Data Services division at the San Diego Supercomputer Center
(SDSC), at the University of California San Diego (UCSD). Melissa is
part of the EarthCube Coordination Office, and the open Storage Network;
she is PI for the NSF-funded EAGER project, “EAGER: Amplifying Community
Readiness to Increase Public Access to Data.” Prior to joining SDSC,
Melissa was the inaugural Executive Director of the Midwest Big Data
Hub, based at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA)
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). Previously,
she was Staff Associate in the Office of the Assistant Director,
Directorate of Biological Sciences at the National Science Foundation
(NSF), where she also served as an AAAS Science & Technology Policy
Fellow.

**Notes:**

- Community level to data publications & metadata records to Public
  Access Repository  
- How can we better utilize data management plans  
- 2013 memo from President that requires data access for peer reviewed
  publications =\> implementation plans to NSF (2015) and USDA (2014)
  - 2.0 plans are starting to roll out  
  - Research data mandated to be open by agencies w/ focus on long lived
    access  
- NASEM - workshops around open science and data - ethics, conduct,
  reusable, and longevity, fit for purpose  
- FAIR data =\> continuum and aspirational
  - Make it machine ‘actionable’ (metadata, data, software, etc)  
  - Nothing about data quality  
  - Unrelated to open science - “as open as possible and as closed as
    necessary”  
- NSF Public Access Repository
  - 2016 special report history  
  - Results of publicly funded papers, data needs to be access to
    version of record within 12 months OR access to publication  
  - Metadata must be machine readable  
  - Outcome reports from NSF now include publications and other research
    products (ie data)  
- Where is it going
  - Researchers will publish in preferred (FAIR and TRUSTed)  
  - Repos maintain sustained long term access w/ persistent identifier
    and descriptive metadata  
  - Metadata schema “DataSite”  
  - PIs will be responsible for publication  
  - Expected to be live for dataset metadata within a few months  
- Purpose of archives are not always unified
  - Linking funding to output/products  
  - Integration and harmonization
    - Researcher deep dive for fit for reuse  
    - AI-ready and machine actionable  
- Conversations around thresholds -\> how likely is it for data reuse?
  Do we really need to save all data sets or is there some threshold?
  - Learning exercises are important but…  
- Funding agencies (NIH… possibly USDA) are thinking about how do you
  build on past data - standardization of data access/deposit  
- Soils are special because they are at the intersection  
- Updates to SOI cluster and LTAR on this project are forthcoming!

## 22 September 2021 - 1700 UTC

Purpose: Open Discussion

- What are you working on right now related to soil informatics?  
- What are you curious about?

Recap:  
About half dozen of us called in for a great chat on our current
projects. Stevan Earl pointed out an upcoming LTER seminar series that
looks relevant for soils:
https://lternet.edu/stories/2021-2022-lter-webinar-series/ . There is an
upcoming soil hackathon that I’m organizing on soil pH measurements that
is slowly coming together and it was great to check in with folks on
their own specific projects. Our next meeting is in October and we’ll be
hearing about the Early Career CZ network-of-networks from Bhavna Arora.

## 20 October 2021 - 2300 UTC

**Recap:** We had a lively introduction with some excellent leads on
current workshops and opportunities in soil-related informatics (see
notes document
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing>
).

Bhavna updated us on the Critical Zone Network-of-Networks (see
<https://youtu.be/BAk50R7K8go> ) and how they are developing an
international community through workshops and seminars centered around
critical zone observatory sites. One of their sticky points is data and
how to make data sets from one site/center comparable to a second.

Finally we ran away over time talking about how to move forward with a
paper, seminar series or hackathon to evaluate the current semantic
tools for soil annotations. Watch the slack channel for follow ups on
this!

We don’t currently have a speaker lined up for next month so if you know
of anyone you would like to hear talk on efforts related to soil
informatics we have room!

See you next month!  
-Kathe T-B

**Agenda:**

1.  Round checkin: What is something interesting you’ve heard recently
    about soil informatics? \[15 minutes\]  
2.  Presentation by Dr Bhavna Arora - Intro to Early career CZ
    network-of-networks \[45 minutes\]  
3.  Planning session for future soil data hackathons \[30 minutes\]
    1.  Identify purpose  
    2.  Confirm process  
    3.  Next step action items

NOTES  
Round Checkin:

- 2022 ESIP January Meeting: Call for Sessions DUE November 8th. The
  session proposal portal for the 2022 Earth Science Information
  Partners (ESIP) January Meeting (January 18th-21st, 2022 ONLINE) is
  open now through 11/8. For over 20 years, ESIP meetings have brought
  together the most innovative thinkers and leaders around Earth
  observation data, thus forming a community dedicated to making Earth
  data more discoverable, accessible and useful to researchers,
  practitioners, policy makers, and the public. See, for example, topics
  and speakers from the 2021 ESIP July Meeting.  
- Sci data con links-
  - Scientific vocabulary link:
    <https://www.scidatacon.org/virtual-2021/sessions/351/>  
  - Keynote for Sci Data Con (FAIR digital objects to establish a global
    and interoperable data space) link:
    <https://www.scidatacon.org/virtual-2021/sessions/330/>  
  - I-ADOPT session at Sci Data Con link:
    <https://www.scidatacon.org/virtual-2021/sessions/368/>  
- Oceanography observation model github link:
  <https://github.com/CSIRO-enviro-informatics/PUV-ont>  
- STEPS- Science and Technology for Phosphorus Sustainability project
  link: <https://steps-center.org>  
- CUAHSI Cyberseminar series link:
  <https://www.cuahsi.org/education/cyberseminars/cuahsi-winter-2021-cyberseminar-series-tools-for-integrating-and-synthesizing-data-from-czos-and-watershed-sites/>  
- Abstracts for World congress on soil science link:
  <https://22wcss.org/conference/abstracts/>

Bhavna’s presentation:

- Critical Zone observatories are found throughout the world, in North
  and South America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and Australia  
- Separate methodologies through observatories although area zone shares
  goals and struggles with the same questions  
- Purpose of the group is to bring together early career scientists to
  tackle and think about questions while utilizing similar methods  
- Community motivation in the critical zone observatory network  
- How can this cross-network and cross-site knowledge be facilitated?  
- Came together and created unresolved questions in CZ (critical zone)
  science to prepare for AGU workshop  
- Breakouts sessions were organised at the workshop and
  hypotheses/ideas/insights regarding CZ science were noted in the AGU
  workshop breakouts
  - What kind of data is needed to bridge the gaps  
- Launched library website for CZ research  
- Funding, availability of data/networks, and data harmonization are the
  main limitations to CZ research collaborations  
- For the 2020 workshop, new volunteers joined cohort and community
  engagement grew  
- Goal of linking up with NSF CUAHSI  
- 2020 workshop had 5 groups that separately presented their shared
  interests and moved towards using shared tools and approaches  
- Workshop was found to be very valuable (62% on survey)  
- Beyond workshops, some of the goals have been met including launching
  a special issue released in Earth’s Future and WRR  
- In the works: forward leaning commentary article commenting on survey
  responses, new CUAHSI Cyberseminar series (link above), new AGU 2021
  workshop and town hall  
- Must be data cleaning and harmonization between the different networks
  and groups  
- Center for scientific collaboration and community engagement link:
  <https://www.cscce.org>  
- TERN announced as first Australian DataONE node (harmonizable data)
  link:
  <https://www.tern.org.au/tern-announced-as-first-australian-dataone-node/>

Planning session:

- Hackathons
  - Previous soil data hackathon group focused on bulk density and may
    pull together another hackathon on soil pH
    - How to annotate data with ontology  
    - How to evaluate ontology as fit for a purpose  
    - pH data  
- Account for what had been done and utilize this  
- Is domain knowledge captured; search and recall and knowledge
  representation perspective, how do soil scientists view the world;
  share data that you can put in models or capture knowledge to focus on
  inferencing at scale; can be both but must be stated if both  
- Differing methodologies represents an ontology on its own  
- Can review or look at pH methodologies in the workshops; craft this
  into a report or a paper

## 17 November 2021 - 1700 UTC

*Recap:*  
Greetings wordy soil people,

Sorry for the delay in this recap. Last week we talked through next year
activities for the cluster. We decided to move forward with a
seminar-like series paired with one page recaps of each presentation.
For the presentations we have a list of 14(!) resources we would like to
hear from and I’ll start reaching out to folks today to get dates nailed
down. The format for the presentations is being discussed here:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/12OtoXo6YV4zK9a79VeJK8XE7iEf02hF9Uf-ggQ8YlG4/edit?usp=sharing
but will include a new position of facilitator.

Facilitators will host the presentation for that week and work up the
initial draft of the 1-page resource summary. If you are willing to do
this please let me know or go to the page and sign up for a week that
works for your schedule.

Still in the ideation phase is a hackathon-like activity and
best-practices manuscript to guide the use/development of these
resources by the research community and stakeholders. If you have
thoughts on this please move the discussion to the Slack channel
https://join.slack.com/t/esip-all/shared_invite/zt-y7pwdwno-IFCN~MELSH0FY_pvGpZK6Q

We will be having a cluster call on December 15th at 1700 UTC. Dr Steven
Quiring (Ohio State University) will be delivering a talk titled
Building a National Soil Moisture Dataset

Best,  
-Kathe TB

*Purpose*: Plan out the Soil Semantic Exploration Campaign (AKA
Boisterous Bettles Hackathon)

- Identify semantic resources related to soils and potential speakers  
- Proposed format:
  - Every 2wks invited talks on soil relevant semantic resources: Why
    was this resource developed? How can it be used?
    - Soil data models
      - GLOSIS  
      - OGCs O&M <https://www.ogc.org/standards/om>  
    - Ontologies
      - ENVO  
      - Chemical Methods Ontology  
      - AGROVOC  
      - SOSA and SSN <https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/>  
      - ODM2
        <https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364815216300093>  
    - Infrastructure
      - OBOE (ENVO?)
        <https://www.anaee-france.fr/en/infrastructure-services/modelling-and-data/semantic-reference-framework> -
        Chistine Le Bas  
      - Wikidata  
      - Science on Schema.org  
    - Thesaurus/glossary
      - SSSA - Soil Glossary (US)  
      - INRAE Thesaurus (French)
        <https://consultation.vocabulaires-ouverts.inrae.fr/thesaurus-inrae/fr/>  
      - Aussies ??  
      - GEMET ([General Multilingual Environmental
        Thesaurus](https://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet/en/themes/))?  
  - Follow up 1 pg recap on off weeks; intended as SI for publication  
  - At end of talks, manuscript submission within 6 months recapping
    findings  
- Timeline:
  - January advertise and finalize speaker schedule  
  - February - May: Talks and one-pagers  
  - Summer 2022: Draft manuscript “Review of semantic tools for soil
    data: current status and future needs”  
  - Fall 2022: revisions and submission of manuscript

## 15 December 2021 - 2300 UTC

*Presentation*: Building a National Soil Moisture Dataset  
*Who*: Steven Quiring (Ohio State University)  
Youtube: <https://youtu.be/NqDlg20yUcs>

Agenda:

- Roll call (please log into
  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing))  
- Update on plan for next year
  - [2022 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP
    Cluster](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12OtoXo6YV4zK9a79VeJK8XE7iEf02hF9Uf-ggQ8YlG4/edit?usp=sharing)  
- Presentation & Discussion

Steven will lead off-presenter discussions  
Metadata by machines (associated with bioportal) - Melissa Cragin  
One-page short take away include how talk about soil characterizations?
QAQC with measurements, slope positions, depth

# Ideas for future topics

Pending scheduling

- ENVO - Pier Luigi Buttigieg  
- Andrew Brown - NRCS - Soil data exercise  
- Kai Blumberg
  - [https://github.com/EnvironmentOntology/envo/wiki/ENVO-Robot-template-and-merge-workflow](https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=https-3A__github.com_EnvironmentOntology_envo_wiki_ENVO-2DRobot-2Dtemplate-2Dand-2Dmerge-2Dworkflow&d=DwMFaQ&c=sJ6xIWYx-zLMB3EPkvcnVg&r=cG4e22DhE_24WgV67TY07bX35Pu84XKMIq_1hkQnll4&m=AmXaES0EHe2Re2QtjL_4_y5T1d4FdAK3X-_1bZJo9Rg&s=RRsmJ-gf_JvhyEtWwc9zQe_9UhUwY55vkbLIaZ7X3Co&e=)
    workflow in order to facilitate ENVO term requests - 2 June
    presentation  
- Presentation from Nic Jelinski - University of Minnesota - linking
  public & private soil datasets (example of soil organic carbon /
  permafrost affected soils in Alaska, USA)  
- 

# Meeting org logistics

## How to `SOIl cluster`

1.  Try to give 1-3 months lead time to any presenter  
2.  Update ‘news’ and ’upcoming activities on the wiki page  
3.  Email mailing list 1-4 days in advance, if you can make it by the
    Friday before then we will get a line in the ESIP all-hands weekly
    mailer  
4.  Start call, for gotomeeting password contact Kathe or Megan Carter  
5.  During the call, have someone not presenting/running the call take
    notes (UF students are currently covering this otherwise ask for
    volunteers).  
6.  After a presentation, get permission from the speaker to share the
    recording. Contact Kathe or Megan Carter to post to YouTube.  
7.  After each meeting push a 1-2 paragraph recap to the mailing list
    and slack channel, include recording link if appropriate.  
8.  Update ‘news’ and ’upcoming activities on the wiki page.

# Introductions

- **Kathe Todd-Brown (UFlorida):** I’m a computational biogeochemist who
  is interested in large datasets to support soil carbon model
  development. I’m a professor at the University of Florida and the data
  coordinator for the International Soil Carbon Network. My interest in
  this group is to develop formal registered language that I can use to
  help harmonize data from different sources.  
- **Tanja Williamson (USGS)**: Hydrologist-Pedologist. I use soils in
  most aspects of hydrologic modeling, research on land-use effects, and
  potential effects of climate change.  
- **Gary Berg-Cross, (Ontolog)** Cognitive Psychologist, original
  cognitive linguistics, long time data and knowledge engineer and
  conceptual models, work on methodologies to help develop ontology
  design patterns. Part of the original cryo vocabulary/glacier domain
  work to harmonize term definitions and EnvO.  
- **Margaret O’Brien (UCSB)** Data manager - with the repository of the
  environmental data initiative ([EDI
  link](https://environmentaldatainitiative.org/)), LTER Network.
  organizes data harmonization efforts for EDI. Some experience with
  ontology (EnvO user). I tend to work mostly with individual scientists
  rather than observatories.  
- **Fenny van Egmond** Soil sensing at ISRIC - World Soil Information
  and Wageningen Environmental Research. Involved in Global Soil
  Partnership (GSP) pillar 4 and 5 for building a Global soil
  information system (GLOSIS), harmonising data exchange (needed for
  GLOSIS), IUSS Soil Information Standards WG lead, co-lead, GLOSOLAN
  soil spectroscopy co-lead. Participate in EJP Soil project where we
  are compiling codelists for soil to aid soil data exchange, connecting
  systems for INSPIRE and want to use the same ones for GSP.  
- **Irfan Ainuddin (Chico)** Soil Scientist. Graduating from Chico State
  Spring 2021. Looking for a job or PhD program. Interested in utilizing
  soil information systems for public education in creative ways.  
- **Andrew Brown**: Soil Scientist; MLRA Soil Survey office Sonora, CA.
  Interest in providing technical support with implementation and
  ingestion of USDA-NRCS / National Cooperative Soil Survey standards
  for use in new semantic technologies.  
- **Jorge S. Mendes de Jesus:** Dev/Op at ISRIC - World Soil
  Information. Supporting server work for Global soil information system
  (GLOSIS).  
- **Bryan Carlson** (LTAR): USDA-ARS Ecoinformaticst for the R.J. Cook
  Agronomy Farm in Pullman, WA.

# Past years

## [2020 Soil ontology - Notes and Agenda](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1w3ScPH6tZCIRcKFiP-BYCa1UihYPei0aL0PcvandV4c/edit?usp=sharing)
