---
title: "2022 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster "
date: '2022'
format: 
  gfm:
    toc: true
    toc-depth: 2
---


**~~The meetings listed here should be reflected in the ESIP calendar~~**  
 **~~[https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/telecon-calendar](https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/telecon-calendar)~~**   
**~~Meetings will alternate between 1700 and 2300 UTC to accommodate time zone differences.~~**  
**~~Meetings will be every other Tuesday at 2000UTC~~**

Asynchronous participation is encouraged 

*  ESIP slack channel \#soil-info. [https://esip-slack-invite.herokuapp.com/](https://esip-slack-invite.herokuapp.com/)   
*  [http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics](http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics) 

# Resources

* Soil data paper (request permissions from Kathe Todd-Brown) [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
* Cluster highlight page: [https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/collaborate/soil](https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/collaborate/soil)   
* Cluster wiki page: [https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil\_Ontologies\_and\_Informatics](https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil_Ontologies_and_Informatics)   
* Mailing list: [http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics](http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics)   
* Cluster proposal: [ESIP Soil Ontology and Informatics Clustering proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wyplA7K7IHIY_yPXTydfFYNTwiXyrZY2R_9lu3LjRhk/edit?usp=sharing)   
* Cluster purpose: [SoilOnt-Purpose](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Fx4B1oLamhacp-bujAL2UrKaTBcSe_gGocaOUYJ_zpA/edit?usp=sharing)  
* Reference list: [Current soil data landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing)  
* YouTube channel: [https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5\_i8iJW\_fzrdsUBR6cBs3LT5Tz](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5_i8iJW_fzrdsUBR6cBs3LT5Tz)   
* Github presentation recaps: [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources) \[Note: plans to transfer to ESIP after draft phase\]  
* Past year cluster notes:  
  * [2021 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * [2020 Soil ontology \- Notes and Agenda](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1w3ScPH6tZCIRcKFiP-BYCa1UihYPei0aL0PcvandV4c/edit?usp=sharing)   
* ESIP suggested cluster roles: [Collaboration Area Roles to Delegate](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12sR7qfluFIehxSBCO4HdciRmfh6J3wNxOOvvKS_VMRU/edit?usp=sharing)

# Overview 

Spring 2022 will focus on a series of presentations paired with a one page recap on soil semantic resources. The plan (as of Fall 2022\) is to transition to a data hackathon annotation exercise supported by resources presented here and work up a lessons-learned best practices manuscript.

## Soil Ontologies and semantic resources

* **Presentations** will be recorded for the cluster YouTube channel; after clarifying questions are asked recordings will stop and the group will transition to open discussion. Please target 30 minutes to allow for time for discussion.  Please also draft a one(ish) page recap of your presentation (Here is a template to get your started [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources/blob/main/00\_Template.Rmd](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources/blob/main/00_Template.Rmd))  Presentations should address the following:  
  * What is this resource?  
  * Why was this resource created?  
  * What are some use case examples?  
  * Who supports and uses this resource?  
* **Facilitators** will introduce the presenter, ensure the presentation is recorded, moderate/host the discussion, and send out a recap within a week of the presentation to the mailing list.(). Please ensure that yourself and your presenter have a brief bio in the introduction section.  
* **One page summary:** The goal of this one page summary is to provide a quick overview of the resource presented. We strive for the draft of the one pager to be posted  the following week onto the github repository ([https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources/blob/main/00_Template.Rmd))

| HHMM (UTC) DD \- Month | Topic | Presenter | Facilitator |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| [1700 05 \- January](#1700-utc-5-january-2022) | Organizational | Kathe Todd-Brown (UFlorida) | NA |
| ~~2300 19 \- January~~ |  | ~~ESIP MEETING CONFLICT~~ |  |
| [1700 02 \- February](#heading=h.koygqxjkknle) | [ODM2](https://github.com/ODM2/ODM2) | Emilio Mayorga (UWashington)  | Lindsay “Bar” Barbieri (ESIP) |
| 2300 16 \- February | [SOSA](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/), [SSN-EXT](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn-ext/) and [TERN Ontology](https://linkeddata-dev.tern.org.au/viewers/tern-ontology) | Simon Cox (CSIRO)  | Brandon Whitehead (Manaaki Whenua) |
| 1700 2 \- March | [OBO](https://obofoundry.org/) and [ENVO](https://sites.google.com/site/environmentontology/) | Kai Blumberg (UArizona)  | Kathe Todd-Brown (U Florida) |
| 2300 16 \- March | Open |  | Kathe Todd-Brown (U Florida) |
| 1700 30 \- March | [GLOSIS](https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis) | Luís de Sousa (ISRIC) | Kathe Todd-Brown (U Florida) |
| 2300 13 \- April | [SSSA \- Soil Glossary](https://www.soils.org/publications/soils-glossary/) | April Ulery (New Mexico SU) | Megan Wong (Fed U Australia) |
| 1700 27 \- April | Semantics for interoperability in ecosystem studies: the [AnaEE \- France Thesaurus](https://opendata.inra.fr/anaeeThes/page/) approach | Christian Pichot (INRAE) | Stevan Earl (ASU) |
| 2300 11 \- May | Logistical | – | – |
| 1700 25 \- May | [OGC O\&M](https://www.ogc.org/standards/om) | Kathi Schleidt (DataCove) |  |
| 2300 8 \- June | [AgGateway WG04 and Modus](https://www.aggateway.org/News/2021Newsletters/2021AprilNewsletter/April2021WorkingGroupRound-Up.aspx) | Andres Ferrerya (AgGateway) |  |
| 1700 22 \- June | [Schema.org](https://schema.org/) | Adam Shepherd (WHOI) |  |
| 2300 6 \- July | Organizational | Kathe Todd-Brown (UFlorida) | NA |
| ~~1700 20 \- July~~ | ESIP SUMMER MEETING | NO CLUSTER CALL |  |
| 2023 3 \- August | [CGI Geoscience Terminolog](http://geosciml.org/resource/def/voc/)y \- creation, governance and use. (Discussion \- cross-disciplinary learnings for the soils domain?) | Mark Rattenbury (GNS Science I Te Pῡ Ao.) Chair, CGI-IUGS Geoscience Terminology Working Group  | Megan Wong (FedUAust) |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |

Confirmed but unscheduled 

1. USDA-NRCS Dylan B (& Andrew B??)   
2. Academic data models Kathe T-B (& Steven E??)   
3. Wikidata & Semantic harmonization \- Gary Berg-Cross 

**Presenter and Facilitator emails:**  
Emilio Mayorga ; Kai Blumberg ; Luís de Sousa ; April Ulery ; Adam Shepherd ; Simon Cox ; Christian Pichot ;Andres Ferrerya ;  Gary Berg-Cross ;  Mark Rattenbury >;

Kathe Todd-Brown  ; Megan Wong ;  Lindsay Barbieri ; Stevan Earl ; Beaudette, Dylan \- NRCS, Sonora, CA ; 

## Soil Data models

Meetings are at 2000 UTC every other Tuesday

[Proposal Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster: 2022-2023](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FZLD3hP2YJqnhoJ86zzT-cYp5vgHxRKg2geww0A2YYE/edit?usp=sharing)

For these presentations we are looking for a 5-10 minute talk with an outline/draft of a manuscript section (presenters who provide this will be invited to co-author [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a) ). We are asking the presenters to cover the following:

* data model (spreadsheet/template) and/or algorithm that used  
* a brief history of how your organization/group arrived at that model  
* some things that it does not do well or that you struggle with implementing  
* what you would keep if you had to redesign the database

We are particularly interested in hearing from groups that work with a diverse stream of data providers.

We will target 2-3 talks per meeting on the same topic/data type. Current data types include:

* Geolocation: surface location, sample time, depth of sample  
  * FIA db \- Erin Berryman (US Forest Service)  
* Soil organic carbon: bulk density, coarse fraction, organic fraction  
* Metals, salts, and acids: pH, elemental analysis, and ionic exchange  
* Nutrients: phosphorus and nitrogen  
* Gas flux: field respiration and incubation  
* Fractions: texture (sand/slit/clay) and sample subsetting (physicochemical fractionation)  
* Isotopes: Radiocarbon and other isotopes

| 2000 UTC DD-Mon-YYYY | Topic | Facilitator |
| ----- | :---- | :---- |
| 6-Sep-2022 | Kick off | Kathe |
| ~~20-Sep-2022~~ | ~~NO CALL~~ |  |
| 4-Oct-2022 | Manuscript | Kathe |
| 18-Oct-2022 | Geolocation \- Erin Berryman (US Forest Service) | Kathe |
| 1-Nov-2022 |  |  |
| 15-Nov-2022 | Metals, salts, and acids \- Skye Wills (USDA) | Kathe |
| 29-Nov-2022 |  |  |
| 13-Dec-2022 | AGU |  |
| 27-Dec-2022 | HOLIDAY |  |
| 10-Jan-2023 |  |  |
| 24-Jan-2023 | ESIP January Meeting |  |
| 7-Feb-2023 |  |  |
| 21-Feb-2023 |  |  |
| 7-Mar-2023 |  |  |
| 21-Mar-2023 |  |  |
| 4-Apr-2023 |  |  |
| 18-Apr-2023 |  |  |
| 2-May-2023 |  |  |
| 16-May-2023 |  |  |
| 30-May-2023 |  |  |
| 13-Jun-2023 |  |  |
| 27-Jun-2023 |  |  |

# Roll call here

[RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) \- Add your name and write “here” under the current date. Please also scroll down and add a brief [Introductions](#introductions) below the notes and recaps.

# Notes and recap

## 2022 UTC 29 November 2022

**Topic**: Manuscript outline  
**Lead**: Kathe TB  
**Agenda**:

* \[5 minutes\] Opening \- Review agenda \- [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
* \[15 minutes\] Welcome  
  * \[Rounds\] Name \- Affiliation or location \- Anything you’ve heard recently about soil data/information that you would like to share?  
* \[15 minutes\] Review [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
* \[15 minutes\] Feedback on data model manuscript   
  * What ontologies and semantics do we need to align to?  
  * Purpose  
  * Outline

**Recap/notes**:  
FYI:  ISRIC report that provided the basis for the current list of physio-chemical properties: [https://doi.org/10.17027/isric-dcmkd4-g431](https://nam10.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fdoi.org%2F10.17027%2Fisric-dcmkd4-g431&data=05%7C01%7Ckathe.toddbrown%40essie.ufl.edu%7Ca3c13a1f50d04bc8612008dad1db536f%7C0d4da0f84a314d76ace60a62331e1b84%7C0%7C0%7C638053037182445973%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=tZSKKTvLJHJwAGi615N%2BaQ2NYAJ%2FPN36lY%2BRX15xDAI%3D&reserved=0) \- Luis de Sousa

[https://www.esipfed.org/meetings](https://www.esipfed.org/meetings) (ESIP meetings main page)  
[https://2023januaryesipmeeting.sched.com/](https://2023januaryesipmeeting.sched.com/) (schedule)  
Registration: [https://cvent.me/0RXMKx](https://cvent.me/0RXMKx)

[https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis/issues/72\#issuecomment-1330196881](https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis/issues/72#issuecomment-1330196881)   
[https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis/blob/master/LICENSE](https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis/blob/master/LICENSE) (License \-- Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO)

Think of aligning NLP with process-models based on soil ontology and annotations. 

Manuscript review:  
Trim the introduction by introducing what we know about these semantics and then build over it.   
We want to get to procedures on some level in the data model paper    
[https://soilradiocarbon.org/](https://soilradiocarbon.org/)  
[https://essd.copernicus.org/preprints/essd-2020-195/essd-2020-195.pdf](https://essd.copernicus.org/preprints/essd-2020-195/essd-2020-195.pdf) 

We will meeting next year in January. No more meetings in December. 

## 2022 UTC 15 November 2022

**Topic: Presentation**  
**Who:** Skye Wills (USDA-NRCS)  
**YouTube link:**   
**Presentation:**   
**Agenda:**

* \[10 minute\] Cluster updates & intro  
  * Invitation for draft update/review: [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
* \[30 minutes\] Metals, salts, and acids \- Skye Wills (USDA)-  presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Notes:**

EDI looking at adding annotations to their archives with guidance 

How to classify things that we measure? How do you relate soil properties to labels?   
Thinking about governance on these lines could be interesting\! Making data collected and provided for future decision-making. 

Title: Soil Survey Data for ESIP SOI   
Presenter: Skye Wills (National Leader for Soil Research), USDA-NRCS-NSSC

* The NCSS (National Cooperative Soil Survey) includes both KSSL (Kellog Soil Survey Lab) and cooperative data [https://ncsslabdatamart.sc.egov.usda.gov](https://ncsslabdatamart.sc.egov.usda.gov)   
* The data can be accessed by:

Query, access database, ESRI?, Soil Data Access.  
For example, get on Github \-\> Vignette \-\> lab\_chemical\_properties

* Watch out for semantics of the soil terms\! (example., bulk density usage)  
* As per US laws, Geographic data access is maintained   
* KSSL methods manual (an index to methods) [https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/2022-10/SSIR42-v6-pt1.pdf](https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/2022-10/SSIR42-v6-pt1.pdf)  
* The calculations (analytes?) of the reported values are also embedded in the procedure   
* What is SPSD?  
* Soil survey data is available in various formats and its vital to harmonize and make it accessible to readers

Q\&A:   
The library does a good job of making the data understandable

## 2000 UTC 1 November 2022

**Topic**: Manuscript outline  
**Lead**: Kathe TB  
**Agenda**:

* \[5 minutes\] Opening \- Review agenda \- [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
* \[15 minutes\] Welcome  
  * \[Rounds\] Name \- Affiliation or location \- Anything you’ve heard recently about soil data/information that you would like to share?  
* \[15 minutes\] Review [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
* \[15 minutes\] Feedback on data model manuscript   
  * What ontologies and semantics do we need to align to?  
  * Purpose  
  * Outline

**Recap**:  
Greetings\!  
We had 10 people join us for the meeting this week\! The meeting was centered around work-flow of the manuscript, such as thoughts on what ontologies to follow to work with the manuscript, involvement of folks from various geographic locations covering Asia, Africa drawing their perspectives on key ontologies and other comments on the manuscript (in detail under notes section). Moving forward, we have a presentation by Dr. Skye Wills in our next meeting (November 15, 2022\) speaking about metals, salts, and acids in soil.

**Notes:**

Any suggestions on the ontology of land use and land-use change? \- question about Indigenous data and land management made me think of Stephanie Russo Carrol and her work with the Indigenous Governance Database: [https://nnigovernance.arizona.edu/](https://nnigovernance.arizona.edu/)

ICRW8  
Inter agency conference on watershed : Link to [https://icrwatersheds.org/](https://icrwatersheds.org/)  
This year’s theme for ICRW8 is “**Adaptive watershed science and ecosystem management in a changing climate**.” Presenters will include researchers from government, academic, nonprofit, and community organizations working to protect, restore, and manage water resources at local to national scales. Abstracts are due December 15, 2022 by 11:59 PM PST.   
Ignite@AGU talks: [https://igniteagu.io/](https://igniteagu.io/) (Due Tues Nov 1 \- email ESIP Comms Director Allison Mills for an extension [](mailto:))

Gary mentioned some semantic harmonization & FAIR ontology work \-   
From ICBO a workshop on [**FAIR ontology harmonization and TRUST data interoperability (FOHTI**](https://icbo-conference.github.io/icbo2022/workshops-and-tutorials/#fair-ontology-harmonization-and-trust-data-interoperability-fohti)**)**  
A related panel at US2TS was Towards FAIR, Trustworthy and Harmonized Semantic Resources (Part of FOHTI-22: FAIR ontology harmonization and TRUST data interoperability Workshop)(FAIR Semantic Resources) (listed in [https://us2ts.org/2022/program](https://us2ts.org/2022/program))

The 2023 Ontology Summit under development with James Overton and Pascal Hitzler will be on   
Working title of the topic: “How to make ontologies easier for Users: Tools, techniques and standards  
See as example last year’s Summit: [https://ontologforum.org/index.php/OntologySummit2022](https://ontologforum.org/index.php/OntologySummit2022)

**Links shared by Dr. Wong**   
[**https://ardc.edu.au/event/vocabulary-symposium-2022/**](https://ardc.edu.au/event/vocabulary-symposium-2022/)  
[**https://sites.google.com/ardc.edu.au/vocabulary-symposium-2022/program?authuser=0**](https://sites.google.com/ardc.edu.au/vocabulary-symposium-2022/program?authuser=0)

Discussion on Data Model Manuscript:

* What ontologies do we use to align the data model manuscript to? (envo is the current ontology tool being followed).  
* The manuscript is currently focussed on layer level soil measurements, also additionally text on gas fluxes.   
* An example of relevant ontologies STWO:AnOntology for Soil Food Web Reconstruction  [http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2969/paper1-s4biodiv.pd](http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2969/paper1-s4biodiv.pd)  
* Perspectives from across the globe from different continents on key ontologies could add to the building up of the manuscript.   
* Environment Exposure Ontology has terms on the pedosphere- astronomical body part which is composed of soil, subject to soil formation processes, and found on the surface of a lithosphere.  
* Any reference to experimental design or sampling being provided?  
* A european perspective \- Ontology for sustainable soil and land management [https://www.soilmissionsupport.eu/news-2022/ontology](https://www.soilmissionsupport.eu/news-2022/ontology)  
* Development of an Ontology-Based Knowledge Network by Interconnecting Soil/Water Concepts/Properties, Derived from Standards Methods and Published Scientific References Outlining Infiltration/Percolation Process of Contaminated Water  
* This is focusing on experimental soil C cycling use cases? May want to narrow up front, define 3 or so use cases. There is some ambiguity on defining experimental here\!  
* Diving into chemistry ontologies to throw light on measurements and calculations associated with soils data (for example, pH etc)?  
* An Ontology of Soil Properties and Processes  [https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Heshan-Du/publication/308569099\_An\_Ontology\_of\_Soil\_Properties\_and\_Processes/links/580c26ff08aecba93500d2f9/An-Ontology-of-Soil-Properties-and-Processes.pdf](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Heshan-Du/publication/308569099_An_Ontology_of_Soil_Properties_and_Processes/links/580c26ff08aecba93500d2f9/An-Ontology-of-Soil-Properties-and-Processes.pdf) 

Next meeting we have Skye Wills (USDA) presenting on Metals, salts, and acids in soil.  

FYI: The US-DOE-BER-ESS has a funding call out [https://science.osti.gov/ber/-/media/grants/pdf/foas/2023/SC\_FOA\_0002849.pdf](https://science.osti.gov/ber/-/media/grants/pdf/foas/2023/SC_FOA_0002849.pdf) Key part that may be relevant to us is a “Synthesis approach” award for 2yr of $400K. Specifically: “synthesis studies using existing data that address testing of ESS relevant hypotheses and development of transferable insights across ecosystems, watersheds, and regions.”

## 2000 UTC 18 October 2022

**Topic: Presentation**  
**Who:** Erin Berryman (US Forest Service)  
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/Sdm0HzGQz\_U](https://youtu.be/Sdm0HzGQz_U)   
**Presentation:** [20221018\_Geolocations\_USDA-FS\_Berryman.pdf](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-O48rJCAO8rUK5vHAjwafIGbwuzELWkC/view?usp=sharing)  
**Agenda:**

* \[10 minute\] Cluster updates & intro  
  * Invitation for draft update/review: [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
* \[30 minutes\] Geolocation \- Erin Berryman (US Forest Service) \-  presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**  
Greetings all\!

We had a fantastic presentation from Erin Berryman from the US Forest Service on how the Forest Inventory and Analysis database deals with geo-location including a history of the database, and how the forest service balances privacy concerns with public resource data. Main take away precise geolocation of the plots is kept in-house and the public data has random noise introduced into the data and some small number of locations swapped within counties. You can hear more (plus bonus material on litter & soil surveys in the FIA) on the youtube recording here: https://youtu.be/Sdm0HzGQz\_U and in the slide deck posted on the meeting notes: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/12OtoXo6YV4zK9a79VeJK8XE7iEf02hF9Uf-ggQ8YlG4/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12OtoXo6YV4zK9a79VeJK8XE7iEf02hF9Uf-ggQ8YlG4/edit?usp=sharing)

ESIP January meeting call for sessions is here: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/11LWiAD94Qft7\_UA7kxtHoGAoB7XmjEijP879yn5YDBQ/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11LWiAD94Qft7_UA7kxtHoGAoB7XmjEijP879yn5YDBQ/edit) and the forest service stakeholders meeting held every 2-3 years is here: [https://whova.com/portal/registration/scien1\_202211/](https://whova.com/portal/registration/scien1_202211/) 

On November 1 at 2000UTC we will be meeting to talk about the data model manuscript\! Recent developments on here include: 

1) Proposed text for the introduction and first few sections by Christine Le Bas and Tanja Williamson.  
2) Suggestions by Christine Le Bas specific soil ontology resources and relevant links

Hope to see you on call in November\!  
\-Kathe

**Notes**:  
New paper on Impact of tillage on aggregation: [https://soil.copernicus.org/articles/8/621/2022/](https://soil.copernicus.org/articles/8/621/2022/) looks like it has a good data set\! (though Excel :( )

Call for ESIP January meeting sessions: [Call for Sessions JAN23](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11LWiAD94Qft7_UA7kxtHoGAoB7XmjEijP879yn5YDBQ/edit)  
FIA Science stakeholder meeting this year  [https://www.fia.fs.usda.gov/](https://www.fia.fs.usda.gov/)   
Science Stakeholder Registration Link:- [https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwhova.com%2Fportal%2Fregistration%2Fscien1\_202211%2F\&data=05%7C01%7C%7C83243f8da0eb4805d07d08dab04242e1%7Ced5b36e701ee4ebc867ee03cfa0d4697%7C0%7C0%7C638016095923119009%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C\&sdata=JhGXaZyCesv5FY3QRvFf%2FjKCoP3KZGsVQMNdx2NKEDo%3D\&reserved=0](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwhova.com%2Fportal%2Fregistration%2Fscien1_202211%2F&data=05%7C01%7C%7C83243f8da0eb4805d07d08dab04242e1%7Ced5b36e701ee4ebc867ee03cfa0d4697%7C0%7C0%7C638016095923119009%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=JhGXaZyCesv5FY3QRvFf%2FjKCoP3KZGsVQMNdx2NKEDo%3D&reserved=0) 

Agenda for next meeting is going to be on manuscript writing 

## 2000 UTC 4 October 2022

**Topic**: Manuscript outline  
**Lead**: Kathe TB  
**Agenda**:

* \[5 minutes\] Opening \- Review agenda \- [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
* \[15 minutes\] Welcome  
  * \[Rounds\] Name \- Affiliation or location \- Anything you’ve heard recently about soil data/information that you would like to share?  
* \[15 minutes\] Review [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
* \[15 minutes\] Feedback on data model manuscript   
  * Purpose  
  * Outline

**Recap**:

My apologies for this late recap. We met Oct 4  after a month-long hiatus (hurricane Ian in Florida\!) with about 8 folks calling in. ESIP updates & reminders: applications for fellowships are coming up, life-time achievement awards nominations are due, ESIP is leading IGNITE@AGU and proposals for ESIP winter meeting are open. (links and other announcements are on the notes document)

Most of discussion focus on the Soil Data Model draft. Broadly, the manuscript is aimed at providing a reference for future researchers in soil science to pattern their own custom data templates on. As well as, bring forward existing semantic resources and how to use them.

Moving forward we have a speaker for the next session (scheduled on October 18, 2022\) Dr. Erin Berryman who will cover the topics on geolocation (surface location, sample time, depth of the sample) in the US Forest Service FIA data base; and might also talk about litter & debris quantification\! The presentation will be recorded for those who can’t make it.

See you next week\!  
\-Kathe

**Notes**:

KTB is going to touch base on the data model manuscript.   
ESIP updates \- [Community Fellow applications](https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/student-opportunities) are due Friday Oct 7, life-time achievement awards \- [Martha Maiden Award](https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/peer-recognition/martha-maiden-award) \- and [Partner of the Year Award](https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/peer-recognition/esip-of-the-year-partner-award)  
Sci-Comm event ‘IGNITE’ @ AGU meet on wednesday night\! [https://igniteagu.io/](https://igniteagu.io/) We are looking for speakers and the soils crowd would be great to highlight.

KTB is planning on coming up with a course on metadata, something like reading on Data Centric Biology by Sabine Leoneli. 

[https://github.com/EnvironmentOntology/envo/issues/1356](https://github.com/EnvironmentOntology/envo/issues/1356) \- has a lot of information on soil activity  

The overleaf document has been shared with everyone in the group to work on the manuscript (the outline is currently up on the document). The target audience focusing more towards research community as opposed to just informatics standpoint  

Concerned that it is too much ‘textbook’ structure. Need a semantic round up. Could be a strength because it’s easy to follow repeated structure. Paired with a resource for data annotation for folks to create a data template/annotation. Thinking of the target audience \- for researchers to get access to data up to date. The format appears to be consistent. Think of best practices weaved into the manuscript? The outline is designed more towards a general informative level as opposed to specific scientific soil concepts. The graduate student (Vaasuki) will be working on the paper in depth, building annotations. This paper will serve more as a reference for future research. 

Next session (October 18, 2022\) we will have a speaker Dr. Erin Berryman on the topic \- Geolocation. 

## 2000 UTC 6 September 2022

**Topic**: Kick off  
**Lead**: Kathe TB  
**Agenda**:

* \[5 minutes\] Opening  
* \[15 minutes\] Welcome  
  * \[Rounds\] Name \- Affiliation or location \- Anything you’ve heard recently about soil data/information that you would like to share?  
* \[5 minutes\] Review of spring/summer presentations  
* \[10 minutes\] Orientation to upcoming fall/winter presentations  
* \[15 minutes\] Feedback on data model manuscript [Proposal Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster: 2022-2023](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FZLD3hP2YJqnhoJ86zzT-cYp5vgHxRKg2geww0A2YYE/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Journal?  
  * Purpose?  
  * Outline?

**Recap**:

We had a fantastic kick off meeting today with about 8 folks calling in, although the new time caused a few folks to miss out. We reviewed the spring/summer presentations and there is a plan in the works to curate the YouTube list and create a guide for those interested in soil semantics resources. We have plans for data model/template presentations from data collection/aggregators but are waiting to hear back on exact timings. However we probably have enough to start moving forward with a manuscript\!

Broadly speaking folks were interested in the outlined topics (see Soil Data models section on the notes document). But noted gaps in data on hydrology and physical structure 

There was an interesting discussion on tabular vs graphical data models; acknowledging the legacy of tabular data in the field but contrasting this with the current ‘data models’ and informatics trends that are emerging using graphical data. This may make a good section on a paper and it would be useful to try to keep in mind as we develop.

Moving forward we are hoping to line up presentations from data aggregation projects but likely have enough information to move forward with a manuscript regardless of response. Look for drafts flying around this fall\!

\-Kathe

**Notes**:

1. Review of spring/summer presentations

\-Youtube videos are available for the seminars with brief summaries.  
\-Thinking for this fall term: how to integrate data models (not a data model in literal sense?) with datasets from diverse structures  
\-History behind the origin of the model

2. Orientation to upcoming fall/winter presentations

\-Focusing on data aggregation projects   
\-Topics for invited seminars \- Geolocation, soc, gas fluxes, fractionations, isotopes etc   
\-Hydrologic models are not included at this point    
\-Alternate seminar presentations and manuscript writing   
\-Building an ENVO soil ontology \- interested in soil taxonomy   
\-Open invitation to participate in Dr. Todd Brown’s lab meetings discussing on workflow   
\-Synthesis and connection between informatics work for data collectors 

3. Feedback on data model manuscript 

\-focus on data aggregation from putting data from different studies   
\-synthesis of data: mostly observational data  
\-tabular based model currently  
\-ideas on moving from tabular to unstructured data format?   
\-strengthening methodology vocabulary, narrowing down procedures   
\-contrast in data aggregation on research side and top-down approach of sop   
\-universal one-data model does not exist, it is just about making it accessible in digging information 

Try to work on drafting the proposal to get funding.

Closing thoughts-  
Will pull together the outline, follow up with the speakers  
Work on the draft of the manuscript   
If there is no presentation we shall do a manuscript call  

## 2300 UTC 3 August 2022

**Topic:** [CGI Geoscience Terminolog](http://geosciml.org/resource/def/voc/)y \- creation, governance and use  
**Who:** Mark Rattenbury (GNS Science I Te Pῡ Ao.) Chair, CGI-IUGS Geoscience Terminology Working Group  
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/8EBqxWvDjco](https://youtu.be/8EBqxWvDjco)   
**Github link:** [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources/blob/main/15\_CGI.Rmd](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources/blob/main/15_CGI.Rmd)   
**Agenda:**

* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * Recap from Cluster proposal session on Monday and proposed changes to presentation outline  
  * [Proposal Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster: 2022-2023](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FZLD3hP2YJqnhoJ86zzT-cYp5vgHxRKg2geww0A2YYE/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * [Bridging soil data and semantics](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing)  
* \[10 minutes\] Anything new in soil ontology or informatics that has caught your attention?	  
* \[30 minutes\] CGI Geoscience Terminology \- Mark Rattenbury presenting (Recorded)  
* \[15 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:

## 2300 UTC 6 July 2022

**Topic:**  ESIP July meeting and beyond  
**Recap**: We talked today about the plans for the July ESIP session with specific focus on prompts for the breakout rooms (you can read more here and/or leave a comment [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing) ) We also explored some ideas about next steps for the clusters after the summer sessions; there were a lot of thoughts on possible collaboration/coordination opportunities moving forward on any data harmonization activities. The idea of continuing the cluster calls and standing up a team to work on a manuscript was entirely uncontroversial. We’ll continue these conversations (especially on the data harmonizaiton) moving forward and work up specific action plans for future cluster presentations and a paper in the near future.

**Agenda**:

* \[5 minutes\] Opening  
  * Who is here: [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)   
  * Anything to add to the agenda?  
* \[10 minutes\] Anything new in soil ontology or informatics that has caught your attention?  
* July Meeting  
  * \[5 minutes\] Review session outline: [Bridging soil data and semantics](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * \[5 minutes\] Anything to add or needs to be clarified?  
  * \[5 minutes\] Identify rolls for folks who want to help  
* \[30 minutes\] Feedback discussion on next steps for SOI Cluster  
  * Continued Cluster presentations to onboard new participants and stay connected to broader efforts  
    * Astromat w/ NASA  
    * Global Earth Science instruments data  
    * Global Soil Partnership  
  * Paper on soil data model highlighting existing collection strengths  
    * “What to measure when you want to measure what everyone else measures”  
  * Workflow development for data harmonization (download, annotate, merge, prune)  
    * extend/refine ISCN’s SOC-DRAHR2  
  * Vocabulary development for soil observation variables (bulk density, organic carbon fraction, organic matter fraction, …)  
    * Selectively prune SSSA Glossary (ensure alignment with NRCS-NCSS, GLOSIS and Aust lists) and merge into ENVo. Can we align w/ utilise I-ADOPT framework? Where can we re-use ChEBI, GeoSci vocabs, other existing semantic resources?  
  * Vocabulary development for soil measurement procedures (loss on ignition at XX degrees C, YY mm sieved mass per volume, …)  
    * Merge/align NRCS-NCSS, Australian standard procedure codelists, and GLOSIS codelists, ISO codelist,  then extend based on data collection expertise  
  * May be Global Soil Partnership business? \-   
    * (soil related features?)  
    * (soil classification alignment?)   
  * Workflows for the above, underpinned by governance   
    * Governance \- review of models in other domains \-  understanding roles/responsibilities/interaction w Global Soil Partnership, FAO, funding models  
    * EarthCube \- metadata for machines (pilot workshop) \- will show tooling for metadata production with links to BioPortal Ontologies (type of workflow); [CEDAR tools](https://more.metadatacenter.org/tools-training/cedar-metadata-tools)  
    * Nic Carr’s various vocab workflows (Prez)  
    * Where does RO-Crate fit in? Does/could it?

## 1700 UTC 22 June 2022 

**Topic:** [Schema.org](https://schema.org/)  
**Who:** Adam Shepherd (WHOI)  
**YouTube link:** [Science on Schema.org to the ESIP-SOI Cluster \- 22 June 2022](https://youtu.be/s0TzXWGsf34)   
**Github link:**   
**Resource link:** [https://github.com/ESIPFed/science-on-schema.org](https://github.com/ESIPFed/science-on-schema.org)   
**Agenda:**

* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * Recap from Monday’s workshop [Session 1: recap and notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MBn-OUtCA78mW8vAmCjEeuQlROm4bqEC8iUuWARvUnY/edit?usp=sharing)  
* \[30 minutes\] Schema.org \- Adam Shepherd presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:


## 2300 UTC 8 June 2022

**Topic:** [AgGateway WG04 and Modus](https://www.aggateway.org/News/2021Newsletters/2021AprilNewsletter/April2021WorkingGroupRound-Up.aspx)  
**Who:** Andres Ferrerya (AgGateway)  
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/\_wMW\_70F5xI](https://youtu.be/_wMW_70F5xI)   
**Github link:**  
**Agenda:**

* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * ESIP July Meeting \- is doing virtual\! (sort of)  
  * Summer workshop series: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing) (50 folks currently registered)   
  * Need one pagers for the following calls  
    * Simon Cox 16-Feb  
    * Luis Sousa 30-March (Currently an empty template)  
    * Christian Pichot 27-April  
* \[30 minutes\] [AgGateway WG04 and Modus](https://www.aggateway.org/News/2021Newsletters/2021AprilNewsletter/April2021WorkingGroupRound-Up.aspx) \- Andres Ferrerya (AgGateway) \- presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:

## 1700 UTC 25 May 2022

**Topic:** [OGC O\&M](https://www.ogc.org/standards/om)  
**Who:** Kathi Schleidt (DataCove)  
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/bYDSgs2fKLk](https://youtu.be/bYDSgs2fKLk)   
**Github link:** [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources/blob/main/14\_OMS.Rmd](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources/blob/main/14_OMS.Rmd)   
**Agenda:**

* \[10 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) \- please check in here\!  
  * June workshop and summer series updates: [Bridging soil data and semantics](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Other announcements?  
* \[30 minutes\] OGC O\&M \- Kathi Schleidt presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:

* Workshop planning led by Kathe Todd-Brown:  
  * Thinking about aerobic respiration as a presentation concept  
  * Parts of data that we are hoping the presenters focus on from all different fields  
  * Presentation on semantic section on ontologies aligned with this such as agro, and others  
  * How would you align (but not conform) this with CF conventions \-\> could go under data models  
    * Getting data, making data with people from different fields interested in the data  
  * Semantic harmonization cluster has done something similar to this  
    * Harmonize between different ontologies that overlap  
    * Harmonize between how people talk about data in the group  
  * Picking on ENVO makes a lot of sense here  
  * SOSA is ontology for observation things  
    * About sensors and observations and doesn't mention soil \-\> only connects through fact that the sensors are measuring soil  
  * Recording why you took a measurement is valuable and contextualizes the information  
    * Fuzzy between sample processing and procedure associated with the measurement \-\> not well defined in the domain space  
      * Governance/definitions should come from the domain space  
  * Why not start with the systems we have and test to see if we run into trouble with terms/definitions/names/ontologies used  
    * Without doing this, the issues are hypothetical \= difficult to make game plan  
* Presentation by Kathi Schleidt:  
  * Observations and measurements and samples  
  * Changed ISO project name to add samples \-\> OMS  
  * Utilized across diverse INSPIRE themes as well as smart cities and digital twins  
  * What is the standard for ISO ontologies with OMS?  
    * Classic way to provide attributes: ex. assigning color and expression for a smiley face  
      * What do we want to provide information on the procedure of switching color or expression?  
      * Want to provide information on procedure used: ex. Swatch comparison  
      * Adding observation node along color for observation of property  
      * Feature of interest has inverse relation to specialize color or just a general related observation for the properties  
      * Updates:  
        * Adding concepts-   
        * Observer \- to not only say how the process is done but also who did the process  
        * Host- where you are measuring something \- where are sensors mounted on?, where is the wider thing that the observation is related to?  
      * Attributes added to simple diagram for ontologies of color/expression of smiley face: host, observer, observed property, procedure, result, and feature of interest  
        * Can add more contextual information, such as deployment  
        * Times you can add: phenomenon time (when did the thing happen), result time (when was result available), valid time (rare \- what time span is the value best used for \- helpful for modeling results too)  
      * Is the smiley face changes from yellow to green, the results for the 2 days of measurements are different  
        * Soil measurement example of this result change in short period includes soil pH, soil moisture  
        * The ontology model is general enough to include these time series measurements  
        * Observation collection added into new OMS \- allows for resampling of same place but with different method/machine or other similar issues  
      * Feature of interest can also be added to ontology:  
        * Proximate feature of interest- sample i've taken and this sample is a placeholder for quality/property of interest  
          * Ex: population of faces and proximate feature of interest is one of focus (green, or yellow, or frown, or smile)  
        * Ultimate feature of interest- the actual measurement  
          * Ex: all smiley faces in population  
  * Can add sampling procedure, sampler, and other information for the date of sampling  
  * Where is the unit of measurement?  
    * Could be included in results, observed property, procedure, or other portions of the ontology  
    * Some even have unit of measurement change through time series \- not good practice  
    * But, regardless of where the unit of measurement is in the ontology, it must be present  
  * Reviewed INSPIRE soil model on APIINSPIRE site  
  * OMS dropbox link: [https://www.dropbox.com/s/n5vva6eqrviyzbw/OMS%20Info%20ESIP.docx?dl=0](https://www.dropbox.com/s/n5vva6eqrviyzbw/OMS%20Info%20ESIP.docx?dl=0)  
  * Presentation dropbox link: [https://www.dropbox.com/s/lsuyuj9yp7njzst/Observations%20en%20Measurement%20%28en%20Samples%29.pptx?dl=0](https://www.dropbox.com/s/lsuyuj9yp7njzst/Observations%20en%20Measurement%20%28en%20Samples%29.pptx?dl=0)  
* Post-meeting workshop planning with Kathe and Gary:  
  * They are using layer level measurements and Kathe is more hoping to cover the research domains  
  * Would love to have Kathi back to talk about OMS  
    * SOSA is often called ontology design pattern  
      * It's a framework that you can use to define your data  
  * Separation of layers and horizon is confusion  
  * Separation of profile and site is because some sites can have multiple profiles  
  * These confusions and difficulties will lead to further discussion and hopefully improvements to ontologies, ENVO, code lists, and the ways people talk about soil data  
  * Possibly have someone from Simon’s group come to talk about Australian data/metrics  
  * Give some requirements about what we want them to cover to have it align better with other topics/content

## 2300 UTC 11 May 2022

July workshop proposal looks like it’s a go\! Do you want to help shape the pre/post virtual sessions? [Bridging soil data and semantics](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing)

**Recap**: Greetings wordy soil folks,  
   
We did not have the presentation today (my apologies for dropping the organizational ball here). But instead had a fantastic planning session today to flesh out the pre/post sessions for the ESIP. Can’t make the ESIP July meeting? Come to the virtual pre/post sessions\! The planning document is open for comments through the end of the week if you have clever ideas and prospective you would like to add\! We’ll roll out an announcement for our first session in June next week.  
   
[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing)  
   
Best,  
\-Kathe

## 1700 UTC 27 April 2022

**Topic:** Semantics for interoperability in ecosystem studies: the [AnaEE \- France Thesaurus](https://opendata.inra.fr/anaeeThes/page/) approach \- Towards an integrated workflow from collection to publication  
**Who:** Christian Pichot (INRAE)  
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/C5rgT\_Mfqhw](https://youtu.be/C5rgT_Mfqhw)   
**Github link:**  
**Agenda:**

* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * July Meeting proposal [Bridging soil data and semantics](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing)   
* \[30 minutes\] Semantics for interoperability in ecosystem studies: the AnaEE approach \- Christian Picho presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:


## 2300 UTC 13 April 2022

**Topic:** [SSSA \- Soil Glossary](https://www.soils.org/publications/soils-glossary/)  
**Who:** April Ulery (New Mexico SU)  
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/BZ4U8-K4QIY](https://youtu.be/BZ4U8-K4QIY)   
**Github link:** [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources/blob/main/16\_SSSAGlossary.Rmd](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources/blob/main/16_SSSAGlossary.Rmd)   
**Agenda:**

* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * GLOSIS one pager still pending  
  * Thoughts on ESIP July meeting proposals?  
* \[30 minutes\] SSSA Soil Glossary \- April Ulery presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:

## 1700 UTC 30 March 2022

**Topic:** [GLOSIS](https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis)  
**Who:**[RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)   
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/tBV-GiZ65Gw](https://youtu.be/tBV-GiZ65Gw)   
**Github link:**  
**Presentation: [20220330\_ESIPSoilOntology\_GloSIS\_LSousa.pdf](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Jd0GTI9vfMAiSoX5tl52KU7O-309WPwQ/view?usp=sharing)**  
**Agenda:**

* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * Still accepting nominations for Cluster co-chairs for next year  
  * Reach out to Kathe if you have thoughts on possible Summer Meeting proposals  
  * ESIP July Meeting: Registration and Details https://2022esipjulymeeting.sched.com/info  
* \[30 minutes\] [GLOSIS](https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis) \- Luís de Sousa (ISRIC) presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:

Global Soil Partnership (5 pillars of action)

- Soil management, awareness, research, data, harmonization  
- 2016/2017 pillar 5 plan of action \=\> identified need for soil information exchange to expand from national/regional data collections internationally  
- International Consultancy (from GSP) 2019  
  - Requirement inventory goal of reuse  
  - Existing soil ontologies (ANZSoilML; INSPIRE; ISO-28258; OGE Soil IE; Wosis; SOTER)  
  - Starting with ISO-28258 augmented with FAO guidelines (GfSD)  
  - Data exchange (XLM O\&M or Semantic Web SOSA)  
- Semantic Web   
  - Domain tuple: Subject \- predicate \- object (RDF basic syntax for data encoding)  
  - Implementation has two types fo elements: URI (Universal resource identifier) and literals  
  - Set of related tuples \=\> knowledge graph  
  - OWL \- ontology meta-langague  
- 

## 2300 UTC 16 March 2022

**Topic:** Open discussion  
**Who:** [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)   
**YouTube link:** \[not recorded\]  
**Agenda:**

* \[15 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * One pagers are up\! Invitation to edit is open: [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources)   
  * We have slots open end of the summer. Call for additional presentations  
* \[15 minutes\] Anything in wordy soils that you would like to share? What are you excited about?  
* \[15 minutes\] Brainstorm \-   
  * Any ideas for the ESIP summer meeting? [Call for Sessions JUL22](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BGplQ1XrlZqoOy_lH-rOSe_VUH3BJzdoVzJXEoFZbwM/edit) \[due April 29\]

**Recap:**  
	We had a small but dedicated group of three call in today to chat soils, data, and ESIP. Two ESIP announcements: first the call for sessions for this Summer Meeting (in person) is open with a due date of April 29 [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BGplQ1XrlZqoOy\_lH-rOSe\_VUH3BJzdoVzJXEoFZbwM/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BGplQ1XrlZqoOy_lH-rOSe_VUH3BJzdoVzJXEoFZbwM/edit?usp=sharing) \! Second the Raskin Scholarships are open until March 25th   [https://esipfed.org/raskin](https://esipfed.org/raskin) if you know of any interested graduate students, please pass this along.  
	We kicked around the idea of proposing a three part activity for this summer meeting structured as a virtual pre-meeting session, followed by an in-person co-session with another cluster, and ending with a post-meeting report out. The exact topic is a little more up in the air \- feel free to message me or drop something in the Slack if you have suggestions.   
	See you in two weeks (1700UTC 30 March 2022\) when we will hear from Luís de Sousa (ISRIC) on GLOSIS\! We need a facilitator for this presentation still so if you are willing please message me to sign up\!

Best,  
\-Kathe

**Notes**:

* ESIP call open. Full in person attendance. Call for Sessions is open, close April 29: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BGplQ1XrlZqoOy\_lH-rOSe\_VUH3BJzdoVzJXEoFZbwM/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BGplQ1XrlZqoOy_lH-rOSe_VUH3BJzdoVzJXEoFZbwM/edit?usp=sharing)   
    
* Raskin Scholarships are open until March 31: [https://esipfed.org/raskin](https://esipfed.org/raskin) \- March 25  
* Kathe Todd-Brown \- stepping down this year. Tanya stepped down 2022 with change in role, Brandon, Dylan \-   
* Aims \- meet and greet/publically, engage, information seminar, data harmonisation and hacking  
* ESIP \- Clusters are supported to follow directives they set, eg if they want to chat/network, or do a working group activity \-  NASA, USGS funded, by MoUs  
* ESIP Labs: [https://www.esipfed.org/lab](https://www.esipfed.org/lab) \- Sometimes tied to clusters, some time not   
* ESIP ideas   
  * Soil measurement ontology  
    *  CoSoDat \- soil carbon   
    * Barb \- soil and soil carbon, how you would search for datasets with certain keywords etc  
    * ISCN data \- soil carbon discovery to interoperability project  
    * Aust \- ANSIS and VAS soil C harmmonisation/descritpion efforts  
    * GLOSIS  
    * Role of ENVO, general data models

* What /how is the soils semantic resources. Scope and how it will be managed, added to, governed by who? How/does it link with groups doing similar \- eg through CODATA, RDA, domains like earth sciences, ESIP Semantic working group  
    
* Soil ontology governance [https://www.sociocracyforall.org/](https://www.sociocracyforall.org/) \- who decides who decides, many voices one song 

## 1700 UTC 2 March 2022

**Topic:** [OBO](https://obofoundry.org/) and [ENVO](https://sites.google.com/site/environmentontology/)  
**Who:** Kai Blumberg (UArizona)  
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/aDqlbd8zkCg](https://youtu.be/aDqlbd8zkCg)   
**One-pager link:** [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources/blob/main/12\_ENVO.Rmd](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources/blob/main/12_ENVO.Rmd)   
**Topics links:** 

* OBO Foundry [https://obofoundry.org/](https://obofoundry.org/)  
* ENVO: [https://obofoundry.org/ontology/envo.html](https://obofoundry.org/ontology/envo.html)  
* Robot Template for ontology design: [https://github.com/EnvironmentOntology/envo/wiki/ENVO-Robot-template-and-merge-workflow](https://github.com/EnvironmentOntology/envo/wiki/ENVO-Robot-template-and-merge-workflow) 

**Agenda:**

* \[10 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * Anything about soil informatics folks would like to share?  
  * [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit#gid=1823742770)  
* \[30 minutes\] OBO & ENVO \- Kai Blumberg presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:

* FAIR \-\> ‘I’ interoperable for both machines and people; applies to both data and vocabs  
* FAIR Vocabs: findable, defined, de-ref iri, hierarchical, accessible  
* Interoperable: Cross linked vocabularies across ontologies/skemas  
* Reusable vocabularies: OWL/syntax shared structures  
* OBO is a collection of many different ontologies designed to interoperate across domains  
* ENVO: community ontology for representing ontologies   
  * notable use case MIxS [https://gensc.org/mixs](https://gensc.org/mixs)  
* FAIR Ontologies have lateral relationships in addition to definitions and dereference URI

## 2300 UTC 16 February 2022 

**Topic:** [SOSA](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/), [SSN-EXT](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn-ext/) and [TERN Ontology](https://linkeddata-dev.tern.org.au/viewers/tern-ontology)  
**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/BHBU5gYAmV4](https://youtu.be/BHBU5gYAmV4)   
**One-pager link:**  
**Topics links:**  
**Agenda:**

* [Opening Landing](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ft1GdDJZ7fl6Dy84x1k1xqRSga01Bw7qZFzQ8bxzNuk/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit#gid=1823742770)  
* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * ODM2 recording is up\! Still working on the one pager.  
  * Anything about soil informatics folks would like to share?  
* \[30 minutes\] [SOSA](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/), [SSN-EXT](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn-ext/) and [TERN Ontology](https://linkeddata-dev.tern.org.au/viewers/tern-ontology)  \- Simon Cox presenting (Recorded), [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/u/0/d/1lZgw4f5PWC-X1B7EhqtvqhVYtTA8IgXtjgBqujcE_5w/edit)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:


## 1700 UTC 02 February 2022 

**Topic:** ODM2

**YouTube link:** [https://youtu.be/fYLcBWSVYZU](https://youtu.be/fYLcBWSVYZU)   
**One-pager link:** [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources/blob/main/10\_ODM2.Rmd](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources/blob/main/10_ODM2.Rmd)   
**Topic link:** [https://github.com/ODM2/ODM2](https://github.com/ODM2/ODM2)

* ODM2 [Entity Relationship Diagrams](http://odm2.github.io/ODM2/schemas/ODM2_Current/diagrams/ODM2OverviewSimplified.html)  
* [https://github.com/ODM2/ODM2/wiki/documentation](https://github.com/ODM2/ODM2/wiki/documentation) 

**Agenda:**

* [Opening Landing](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ft1GdDJZ7fl6Dy84x1k1xqRSga01Bw7qZFzQ8bxzNuk/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit#gid=1823742770)  
* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * Report out from Bar on ESIP Winter meeting  
  * Call for facilitators for later meetings  
* \[30 minutes\] ODM2 \- Emilio Mayorga presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:

* [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit#gid=1823742770)

## 1700 UTC 5 January 2022  {#1700-utc-5-january-2022}

**Topic:** Introduction & Kickoff  
**Who:** Kathe Todd-Brown (facilitator)  
**YouTube link:** None \- open discussion  
**Github link:** None \- org meeting  
**Flow:**

* Introduction round table \[10 minutes \- option for breakout room if large\]  
* Informational check in \[20 minutes\]  
  * What is going on in your sphere of soil data? Do you have any projects or papers or other report outs to share?  
* Review of cluster format \[20 minutes\]:  
  * Call for facilitators  
  * Call for possible presenters  
  * Feedback on report out summary format [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources/blob/main/00\_Template.Rmd](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources/blob/main/00_Template.Rmd)   
  * Feedback on adverts and places to publicize  
* New cluster co-chairs \[10 minutes\]  
  * Thank you Tanja for serving\!  
  * New nominations?

**Notes**:

## \[Template\] 1700/2300 UTC DATE 

**Topic:**   
**Who:**  
**YouTube link:**  
**Github link:**  
**Agenda:**

* \[5 minute\] Cluster updates  
  * AA  
* \[30 minutes\] XX \- YY presenting (Recorded)  
* \[20 minutes\] Q\&A  
  * Call for clarifying questions (recorded)  
  * Open discussion (not recorded)

**Recap:**

* Why was this resource created?  
* How is or could this resource be used in conjunction with soil data?  
* Who supports and uses this resource?

**Notes**:

# Introductions {#introductions}

* **Kathe Todd-Brown (UFlorida):** I’m a computational biogeochemist who is interested in large datasets to support soil carbon model development. I’m a professor at the University of Florida and the data coordinator for the International Soil Carbon Network. My interest in this group is to develop formal registered language that I can use to help harmonize data from different sources.  
* **Luís M. de Sousa (ISRIC):** Geo-Informatics Scientist. Working on the [Global Soil Information Ontology (GloSIS) Web Ontology](https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis).  
* **Suzanne Hodgkins (Ohio State):** I’m a biogeochemist who got into data management in 2018\. I’m currently working on data management for the [EMERGE project](https://emerge-bii.github.io/), which examines microbial responses to climate changes in Arctic peat soils. We are working to integrate the project’s highly-interdisciplinary data via the [EMERGE-DB](http://emerge-db.asc.ohio-state.edu/) graph database.  
* **Gary Berg-Cross**, Co-lead ESIP Semantic Harmonization cluster

# Announcements and adverts

## General advert

Ever tried to glue together soil data from different sources? Have you ever muttered under your breath that everyone should just use the same data template and be done with it\! Ever tried to use someone else’s data template and found it completely inadequate? Wondered what tools are already out there to talk about soil data?  
The Earth Science Information Partnerships (https://www.esipfed.org/) Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster would like to invite you to our Spring-Summer 2022 cluster calls\! We’ll be hearing from a series of presenters on semantic resources (ie vocabulary lists, ontologies, data models) and how they pertain to soils. 

| HHMM (UTC) DD \- Month | Topic | Presenter |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| 1700 02 \- February | [ODM2](https://github.com/ODM2/ODM2) | Emilio Mayorga (UWashington) |
| 2300 16 \- February | [SOSA](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/), [SSN-EXT](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn-ext/) and [TERN Ontology](https://linkeddata-dev.tern.org.au/viewers/tern-ontology) | Simon Cox (CISRO) |
| 1700 2 \- March | [OBO](https://obofoundry.org/) and [ENVO](https://sites.google.com/site/environmentontology/) | Kai Blumberg (UArizona) |
| 2300 16 \- March | TBD |  |
| 1700 30 \- March | [GLOSIS](https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis) | Luís de Sousa (ISRIC) |
| 2300 13 \- April | [SSSA \- Soil Glossary](https://www.soils.org/publications/soils-glossary/) | April Ulery (NMSU) |
| 1700 27 \- April | Semantics for interoperability in ecosystem studies: the [AnaEE \- France Thesaurus](https://opendata.inra.fr/anaeeThes/page/) approach | Christian Pichot (INRAE) |
| 2300 11 \- May | [AgGateway WG04 and Modus](https://www.aggateway.org/News/2021Newsletters/2021AprilNewsletter/April2021WorkingGroupRound-Up.aspx) | Andres Ferrerya (AgGateway) |
| 1700 25 \- May | [OGC O\&M](https://www.ogc.org/standards/om) | Kathi Schleidt (DataCove) |
| 2300 8 \- June | [Schema.org](https://schema.org/) | Adam Shepherd (WHOI) |

For more information go to the ESIP calendar page https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/telecon-calendar or SOI Cluster wiki page https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil\_Ontologies\_and\_Informatics  
 

#### Sent to:

* April for possible forwarding to SSSA \- 1/26/2022 by KToddBrown  
* “Global soil data exchange” group (includes GSP folks) \- 1/26/2022 by KToddBrown  
* AGU-Biogeosicneces \- 1/26/2022 by KToddBrown  
* Ester for possible forwarding to academies \- 1/26/2022 by KToddBrown  
* Passed along to ISRaD folks \- 1/27/2022 by KToddBrown  
* UF Soil & water \- 1/28/2022 by KToddBrown  
* UF Informatics Inst & UF ESSIE- 1/31/2022 by KToddBrown


## No table

Ever tried to glue together soil data from different sources? Have you ever muttered under your breath that everyone should just use the same data template and be done with it\! Ever tried to use someone else’s data template and found it completely inadequate? Wondered what tools are already out there to talk about soil data?  
	  
The Earth Science Information Partnerships (https://www.esipfed.org/) Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster would like to invite you to our Spring-Summer 2022 cluster calls\! We’ll be hearing from a series of presenters on semantic resources (ie vocabulary lists, ontologies, data models) and how they pertain to soils.

For more information go to the ESIP calendar page https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/telecon-calendar or SOI Cluster wiki page https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil\_Ontologies\_and\_Informatics

#### Sent to: 

* Academic Data Science Alliance Slack \- 1/26/2022 by KToddBrown  
* AgBioData Slack \- 1/26/2022 by KToddBrown  
* EDI Slack \- 1/27/2022 by KToddBrown

## Twitter/short

Calling all wordy soil geeks\! @ESIPfed’s SOI Cluster is hosting a series of presentations on vocabularies, ontologies, and data models for soil\! Come join us every other Wednesday: ​​[https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/telecon-calendar](https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/telecon-calendar)

- [https://twitter.com/KatheMathBio/status/1486336242077749250](https://twitter.com/KatheMathBio/status/1486336242077749250)

What’s almost as hard as taking soil observations? Describing those observations to put them together with other data\! The @ESIPfed SOI Cluster https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/collaborate is doing a deep dive into semantic resources this spring/summer, come join us\! https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil\_Ontologies\_and\_Informatics 

- [https://twitter.com/KatheMathBio/status/1486801660181573637](https://twitter.com/KatheMathBio/status/1486801660181573637) 

First seminar in our series on Feb-2 at 1700 UTC\! Come join the [@ESIPfed](https://twitter.com/ESIPfed/) Soil [\#Ontology](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Ontology) and [\#Informatics](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Informatics) Cluster as we hear more about what ODM2 can contribute to [\#soil](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23soil) [\#data](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23data) systems\! h[ttps://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil\_Ontologies\_and\_Informatics](https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil_Ontologies_and_Informatics) 

- [https://twitter.com/KatheMathBio/status/1488216017004335115](https://twitter.com/KatheMathBio/status/1488216017004335115) 

