---
title: "2023 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster "
date: '2023'
format: 
  gfm:
    toc: true
    toc-depth: 2
---

# Purpose

The Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster helps connect the soils research community and those whose research incorporates soils data to informatics tools for better research. The group develops semantics/ontologies resources, and has an ongoing community building effort to make connections between people who might not otherwise have the chance to meet. 

This year (2023) we will focus on: (...)

# ~~Call in information~~

**~~The meetings listed here should be reflected in the ESIP calendar~~**  
 **~~[https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/telecon-calendar](https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/telecon-calendar)~~** 

**~~Meetings will be every other Tuesday at 2000UTC~~**   
~~(contact Kathe Todd-Brown for a calendar invite)~~

~~Asynchronous participation is encouraged~~ 

*  ~~ESIP slack channel \#soil-info. [https://esip-slack-invite.herokuapp.com/](https://esip-slack-invite.herokuapp.com/)~~   
*  ~~[http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics](http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics)~~ 

# Resources

* Webpage: [https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/collaborate/soil](https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/collaborate/soil)   
* Mailing list (recaps and announcements primarily, low traffic) [http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics](http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics)   
* Slack \#soil-info on esip-all.slack.com [https://join.slack.com/t/esip-all/shared\_invite/zt-1kxf7dlbr-Pmo\_31FwJlpNNSl5MtOPMA](https://join.slack.com/t/esip-all/shared_invite/zt-1kxf7dlbr-Pmo_31FwJlpNNSl5MtOPMA) 

## Resources generated by the cluster

* Reference list: [Current soil data landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing)  
* YouTube channel: [https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5\_i8iJW\_fzrdsUBR6cBs3LT5Tz](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5_i8iJW_fzrdsUBR6cBs3LT5Tz)   
* Github presentation recaps: [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources) \[Note: plans to transfer to ESIP after draft phase\]  
* Soil data paper (request permissions from Kathe Todd-Brown) [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
* [Current soil data landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing)

## Cluster history

Initial documents:

* Cluster proposal: [ESIP Soil Ontology and Informatics Clustering proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wyplA7K7IHIY_yPXTydfFYNTwiXyrZY2R_9lu3LjRhk/edit?usp=sharing)   
* Cluster purpose: [SoilOnt-Purpose](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Fx4B1oLamhacp-bujAL2UrKaTBcSe_gGocaOUYJ_zpA/edit?usp=sharing)

No longer active

* Cluster wiki page: [https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil\_Ontologies\_and\_Informatics](https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil_Ontologies_and_Informatics) 

Past year cluster notes:

* [ 2022 Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster - Meeting Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12OtoXo6YV4zK9a79VeJK8XE7iEf02hF9Uf-ggQ8YlG4/edit?usp=sharing)  
* [2021 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing)  
* [2020 Soil ontology \- Notes and Agenda](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1w3ScPH6tZCIRcKFiP-BYCa1UihYPei0aL0PcvandV4c/edit?usp=sharing) 

New year document: [2024 Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster - Meeting notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wj4fbPuTAidrdlAHzW16iJUo49KO0JcQCrgMkqXDL-M/edit?usp=sharing)

## How to documents

* ESIP suggested cluster roles: [Collaboration Area Roles to Delegate](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12sR7qfluFIehxSBCO4HdciRmfh6J3wNxOOvvKS_VMRU/edit?usp=sharing)

# Calendar overview 

*Update the calendar here [Calendar - ESIP SOI Cluster](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1cL6k2J0UBELKYoNMnQpW0Rr8aEaUks81zmMYgeFteGg/edit?usp=sharing) to update the table below*

| Tuesday 2000UTC | Topic | Note |
| ----- | :---- | :---- |
| 10-Jan | Intro and priority | Focus next year on soil measurement semantics paired with testing harmonization workflows. Revisit previous presentations for updates. |
| 24-Jan | ESIP January Meeting; no cluster call\! |  |
| 7-Feb |  |  |
| 21-Feb | Organization | Identify presenters for this year. Recertify interest in manuscript. Invitation for weekly data harmonization working group out of Todd-Brown Lab. |
| 7-Mar | Manuscript | Confirmed general structure for subsections |
| 21-Mar | July meeting | Possibly a poster to update on cluster activities but activities not really ready for a full session |
| 4-Apr | Manuscript | Handed out sections for first draft writing |
| 18-Apr |  |  |
| 2-May | No MEETING |  |
| ***23-May*** | GLOSIS \- Luis de Sousa |  |
| 30-May |  |  |
| 13-Jun | ~~Aust National Soil Info System update (ANSIS) \- Megan Wong, etal~~ |  |
| 27-Jun | Manuscript | Shorten to temporal-geolocation and SOC, add OMS links and example connections to FIA, NCSS, or ISCN. |
| 11-July |  |  |
| 25-Jul |  |  |
| 8-Aug | ANSIS vocabularies \- Megan Wong | Megan will present the core Australian National Standard vocabularies that are being used to support data harmonisation through the Australian National Soil Information System (ANSIS) |
| 22-Aug |  |  |
| 5-Sep |  |  |
| 19-Sep |  |  |
| 3-Oct |  |  |
| 17-Oct |  |  |
| 31-Oct |  |  |
| 14-Nov |  |  |
| 28-Nov |  |  |
| 12-Dec |  |  |
| 26-Dec | Winter Holidays |  |

Possible presentations

* ENVO: soil updates and how to contribute  
* ESIP Wildfire Cluster: soil data needs and connections  
* ESIP Semantic Harmonization  
* GLOSIS: data model updates and how to leverage & contribute  
* Coastal Carbon Data Clearinghouse: data model and ingest workflows

# Roll call here

[RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) \- Add your name and write “here” under the current date. Please also scroll down and add a brief [Introduction](#introductions) below the notes and recaps.

# Notes and recap

Each meeting needs an agenda that includes times, a brief purpose statement, a community notes location, and a recap that was sent out to the broader group of what was discussed and any major decisions (100-500 words).

## Pinned topics

* 

## 28 November 2023 1600 US-Eastern

| Minute | Item |
| :---- | :---- |
| 2 | **Opening** \- Review agenda. Next meeting scheduling/lead. [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** \- Showing up… \[excited, sick, tired, distracted,...\] |
| 10 | **Information** \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  | Vocab symposium (not just soils but good breadth) [https://ardc.edu.au/resource/vocabulary-symposium-2023-recordings/](https://ardc.edu.au/resource/vocabulary-symposium-2023-recordings/)  |
| 10 | **Updated Cluster Plan:** The purpose of The Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster is to provide a community of practice to coordinate the development of soil informatics best practices and resources. To do this we will Meet regularly to exchange updates on related projects (for example SOC-DRaH [https://github.com/ISCN/SOCDRaHR2](https://github.com/ISCN/SOCDRaHR2) ) and announce opportunities for community involvement. Develop synthesis manuscripts and resources on the current state of practice (past example: [https://bg.copernicus.org/articles/19/3505/2022/bg-19-3505-2022-discussion.html](https://bg.copernicus.org/articles/19/3505/2022/bg-19-3505-2022-discussion.html), [Current soil data landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing) ) Propose modifications or additions to existing ontologies and semantic resources to better support soil data discovery and harmonization. Goals for 2024: \[June 2024\] Complete the current manuscript draft evaluating current soil semantic resources for the purpose of data harmonization workflows \[August 2024\] develop a plan to propose modifications to a specific semantic or ontology resource \[October 2024\] Include regular updates from at least three soil data projects in meetings and expand attendance our regular cluster calls. Term \- reevaluate October 2024 *Clarifying questions?* |
|  |  |
| 20 | **Reaction** \- What is your reaction to the proposal? |
|  |  |
| 5 | **Decision** \- Is this good enough for now and safe enough to try? |
|  | YES\! |
| 5 | **Check out** \- Leaving this meeting with...  |
|  |  |

## 24 October 2023 1600 US-Eastern

| Minute | Item |
| :---- | :---- |
| 2 | **Opening** \- Review agenda. Next meeting scheduling/lead. [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** \- Showing up… \[excited, sick, tired, distracted,...\] |
| 10 | **Information** \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  |  |
| 20 | **Cluster review** \- How is the cluster going? What do we want to keep? What is working well? |
|  | Writing papers \-\> product driven Learning new stuff Discussion for manuscript paper develop Ontologies Extending professional network |
| 20 | **Cluster review** \- What do we want to change? What isn’t working for us any more. |
|  | Speakers were mixed bags Could be better leveraged to support product driven Be more optimistic about it as opposed to obligation Recruit more soil scientists here Concrete target to work towards (special issues to motivate product\!) Move involvement with  ESIP meeting session Other esip clusters (sem harmonization and sem tech) Better direction Hands on deliverable Better integration with SOC-DRaH or other data harmonization activities Document a data integration via SOC-DRaH Contribute to ENVO(?) |
| 5 | **Check out** \- Leaving this meeting with...  |
|  |  |

## 26 September 2023 1600 US-Eastern

| Minute | Item |
| :---- | :---- |
| 2 | **Opening** \- Review agenda. Next meeting scheduling/lead. [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** \- Showing up… \[excited, sick, tired, distracted,...\] |
| 10 | **Information** \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  | GHG quantification workshop [Building Beta Data Management Protocols for Soil Carbon GHG Quantification \- Farm Foundation](https://www.farmfoundation.org/projects/building-beta-data-management-protocols-for-soil-carbon-ghg-quantification/)  |
| 5 | **Review:** Where does the paper stand right now?  [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)  |
|  | Vaasuki: Saw progress from last time and noticed we are talking about depth of geolocation Stevan: Still some sections that need more information, are these holdovers? Goal is to use C as an example Brandon: Numbered sections have good flow, interested by distinction in depth of discussion for each section \- depends on intended audience Gerbrand: What about the other sections that do not yet have content \- what does the audience want; enjoys text that is currently there Dellena: Keep scope tight and possibly remove empty sections at the end Megan: Tightening purpose of introduction; define the scope; have use case across databases and sections for C or bulk density Overall: Bulk density was well explained; downscale scope of paper; quantification methods; focus on soil C stock and geolocation |
| 25 | **Formulation:** What needs to get done and who is doing it? |
|  | Remove extra sections \- Kathe Semantics section for SOC \- Vaasuki Reframe SOC section in way that its laid out for semantics, not a user's manual; identify gap in relation to semantics a little more \- Stevan Geospatial sections; how deep do we need to go here? – Brandon What other models (ontologies/vocabs/MLs) are available? – Brandon Adding abstract to shape the story \- Gerbrand Improving story by removing inapplicable sections/materials \- Dellena Purpose of paper \- Laying out semantic resources out there to talk about geolocation, depth, time, and soil volumetric density in relation to organic carbon mass; how do you apply semantics for data harmonization Scoping of the paper, try not to re-do work others have done \- Megan To-do’s: Think more about the abstract Draft something before October’s meeting |
| 5 | **Check out** \- Leaving this meeting with...  |
|  |  |

## 8 August 2023 2000 UTC

**Purpose:**  ANSIS vocabulary presentation  
**Recap: [https://youtu.be/lxvZ6\_YDgZQ](https://youtu.be/lxvZ6_YDgZQ)** 

**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * In formation \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[20 minutes\]  ANSIS harmonization supporting vocabularies \- Megen Wong \- Recorded presentation (?confirm this?)  
  * Megan will present core Australian National Standard vocabularies that are being used to support data harmonization through the Australian National Soil Information System (ANSIS)   
* \[5 minutes\] Recorded clarifying questions  
* \[5 minutes\] Unrecorded open discussion  
* \[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:**  
[https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-36113-4](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-36113-4)   
[https://github.com/opengeospatial/Geotech](https://github.com/opengeospatial/Geotech)  
[https://www.ogc.org/initiatives/geotech-ie/](https://www.ogc.org/initiatives/geotech-ie/)

   
[https://esipfed-org.zoom.us/meeting/register/tZ0kcOqprTkvHtHRO-sB5V9RQDemQnjLDCjW](https://esipfed-org.zoom.us/meeting/register/tZ0kcOqprTkvHtHRO-sB5V9RQDemQnjLDCjW) 

Links  ANSIS talk \- 

Diagrams and explanation

 [https://github.com/ANZSoilData/def-au-domain](https://github.com/ANZSoilData/def-au-domain) ‘READ ME’ at Aug 2023 

ANSIS soil domain entity model RDFS/OWL ontology

 [https://github.com/ANZSoilData/def-au-domain/blob/main/rdf/domain.ttl](https://github.com/ANZSoilData/def-au-domain/blob/main/rdf/domain.ttl)

1st release ontology \- [https://raw.githack.com/ANZSoilData/def-au-domain/main/doc/domain](https://raw.githack.com/ANZSoilData/def-au-domain/main/doc/domain)

Supporting Controlled vocabularies: Research vocabularies Australia – search Subject Field: Soil Science [https://vocabs.ardc.edu.au/](https://vocabs.ardc.edu.au/)

1st release JSON schema https://anzsoildata.github.io/def-au-schema-json/docs/ansis-schema

## 11 July 2023 2000 UTC

**Purpose:**  Soil data model manuscript  
**Recap:** 

**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[30 minutes\] – [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
  * \[10 min\] brain storm  
  * \[10 min\] draft outline  
  * \[10 min\] revise  
* \[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*

If we can be very specific about measurement ontologies, we can start to interpret in a different way\! (something like fractions and measurements; KTB’s example on DOC in soil\!)

Guidance on leveraging these models using ontologies ultimately focusing on harmonizing the data. Ultimately placing the methodologies to an ontology source (formal registered ontology for soils hopefully in future\!)

ESS Dive data?

+ Expand to include folks from the major soils databases  
+ Idea of the paper is a pitch to soil scientists to develop ontology resources for data harmonization   
+ How:  
  + Model the practice of data annotation based on general data model (OMS) and then feed that into harmonization pipeline (SOC-DRaH) to create a geospatial database of SOC measurements integrating NRCS-NCSS, FS-FIA, ESS-DIVE soil datasets, PANGAEA (CPEAT), EDI (LTER).  
+ 



## 27 June 2023 2000 UTC

**Purpose:**  Soil data model manuscript  
**Recap:** Greetings all\! 

We had a good conversation on the data model manuscript today. Sounds like we are moving towards a shorter manuscript describing temporal-geolocation of samples and SOC measurements using OMS as a generalized data model to annotate the Forest Service FIA, NRCS NCSS, and ISCN3 data models. The measurement method descriptions will still be useful for ISCN so we will likely be moving that over to a ‘data paper’ there.

Our next call will be July 11 at 2000 UTC

\-Kathe

**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[30 minutes\] – [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
  * \[10 minutes\] Updates from folks on any changes they have made to the document  
  * \[5 minutes \- silent/solo\] read/review outline or draft  
  * \[5 minutes \- round the room\] First reaction that no one else has brought up yet  
  * \[10 minutes \- popcorn discussion\] Second reaction and/or discussion point  
* \[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*

**Thoughts on the Manuscript:**

* Brandon \- will be nice if we can integrate example cases for each section. For example, under geolocation section; speaking about depth and location   
* Thoughts on writing a review paper? What semantic resources are available for soil scientists and where is it coming from, and what are the existing gaps   
* Integrating ISCN examples and observations into the data model paper would be nice  
* Highlighting different vocabularies?  
* Set of databases that are well used currently and then set them as examples   
  * KTB \- FIA & USDA-NCSS can be considered as good examples but they lack good documentation (metadata/data description that currently is available)  
* KTB \- majorly leaning on the gap of not having standardized methodologies already and therefore, focusing on that methodological differences and inconsistencies can be a good main picture of the manuscript   
* Steve \- the need of the variable, method, unit pattern of description for all variables; creating a vocabulary list?   
* Observational ontologies and measurement ontologies as a need for ISCN   
* A decision tree for each important variable with a method associated with it. For example, pH, elemental analysis (N, P, K, macro, micro nutrients)  
* Brandon \- the ‘why’ of the data collection can be dwelled on further   
* Vaasuki \- prepare PPT slides with decision trees for the above mentioned    
* Truncate the current manuscript majorly focusing on location and SOC 

## 30 May 2023 1900 UTC

**Purpose:**  Soil data model manuscript  
**Recap:** *What are the key takeaways or decisions that were made? No more then 2-3 sentences. Copy/paste to mailing list and/or slack chanel to keep folks in the loop*  
**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[30 minutes\] – [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
  * \[10 minutes\] Updates from folks on any changes they have made to the document  
  * \[5 minutes \- silent/solo\] read/review outline or draft  
  * \[5 minutes \- round the room\] First reaction that no one else has brought up yet  
  * \[10 minutes \- popcorn discussion\] Second reaction and/or discussion point  
* \[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*



## 23 May 2023 1900 UTC

**Purpose:** Update on GLOSIS from Luis de Sousa  
**Recap:** Greetings everyone\! 

We had a fantastic update from Luis de Sousa on the latest developments with GloSIS. Their slides are linked in the notes document and the YouTube recording from that conversation is here: [https://youtu.be/cXZKEJ1Jhn4](https://youtu.be/cXZKEJ1Jhn4) . We ARE meeting on 30 May 2023 at 1900 UTC to discuss the Soil data model paper if you are interested in joining.

Best,  
\-Kathe  
**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[30 minutes\] – Seminar  
  * \[20 minutes\] GLOSIS Update by Luis de Sousa \- Recorded presentation  
    * Slides: [20230523\_GLOSIS\_Sousa.pdf](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1P-lP8NIaoo09kDRB2EMDB5tUrxcudmZ8/view?usp=share_link)  
    * YouTube: [https://youtu.be/cXZKEJ1Jhn4](https://youtu.be/cXZKEJ1Jhn4)   
    * Temp recording: [https://esipfed-org.zoom.us/rec/share/-z2ED9ezw2SeBdFKKJYSg1Lqnsa3i9qh9w0AJ-zvxIAQZNEMslHFwLu76wwCYhm6.6EtObFjb9g94NgTq](https://esipfed-org.zoom.us/rec/share/-z2ED9ezw2SeBdFKKJYSg1Lqnsa3i9qh9w0AJ-zvxIAQZNEMslHFwLu76wwCYhm6.6EtObFjb9g94NgTq)    
      * Passcode: %K\*DE$2y  
  * \[5 minutes\] Recorded clarifying questions  
  * \[5 minutes\] Unrecorded open discussion  
* \[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*

Title: GloSIS web ontology: recent developments \- semantics for a decentralized soil information system [https://rapw3k.github.io/glosis/](https://rapw3k.github.io/glosis/) 

* Submitted an article to Semantic Web Journal (peer reviewed journal\!, open-access)  
* A dedicated website with metadata and labeling for the ontology, ease of use to explore how different classes are interacting (documentation is provided)   
* Examples on how to create and prototype with one of these ontologies \[WoSIS, SRDB, LUCAS\]  
* The structuring of the different data variables are in the form of a graph (meaning hyperlinked from one step to another)  
* ISRIC vocabularies are available up on the website   
* Cookbooks on the GloSIS are useful for building these ontologies  
  * RDF creation with a tool called ‘tarql’   
* JSON-FG : new geo-spatial data exchange format  
  * Adds section for semantic content and links to other semantic resources   
* SoilWise project by EU- focused on creating a pan european soil DB aligning ontologies with INSPIRE and GloSIS, AusNZ model   
* GloSIS still needs to have some kind of governance 

The codelist in GloSIS have three main components: FAO guidelines?, pedogenic processes, physico-chemical processes

KTB- How do you distinguish between a variable property and a method? For example, Aluminum extraction is described in detail as opposed to something like pH definition?  
Luis- In this case, pH is a property while the feature of interest is the soil in question like what is the soil class or texture?

## 18 April 2023 1900 UTC

**Purpose:** Update and chats  
**Recap:** *What are the key takeaways or decisions that were made? No more then 2-3 sentences. Copy/paste to mailing list and/or slack channel to keep folks in the loop*

**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Does someone want to lead the discussion next time? Kathe is going on vacation.  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* ~~\[30 minutes\] – GLOSIS \- moved to 23th of May~~  
  * ~~\[20 minutes\] GLOSIS update by Luis de Sousa \- Recorded presentation~~  
    * ~~\[5 minutes\] Recorded clarifying questions~~  
    * ~~\[5 minutes\] Unrecorded open discussion~~  
* ~~\[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps~~

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*  
Not meeting May 2nd — go outside\!  
ESIP registration is open; LTR is going to meet in conjunction with ESIP\! YEA  
Neat blog: [https://www.esipfed.org/merge/guest-blog/air-quality-affects-birds](https://www.esipfed.org/merge/guest-blog/air-quality-affects-birds)



## 4 April 2023 2000 UTC

**Purpose:**  Co-writing on manuscript  
**Recap:** *What are the key takeaways or decisions that were made? No more then 2-3 sentences. Copy/paste to mailing list and/or slack chanel to keep folks in the loop*  
**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[40 minutes\] Manuscript co-writing  
  * \[10 minutes \- silent/solo\] read/review outline or draft  
  * \[5 minutes \- round the room\] Where are you working?  
  * \[20 minutes \- silent/solo\] Writing [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a)   
  * \[5 minutes \- round\] What did you work on?

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*

Kathe started a new ESIP Cluster called “Operational Ethics”\! Folks are welcome to join\!

## 21 March 2023 2000 UTC

**Purpose:**  July ESIP session  
**Recap:** Greetings all\! Recap from last week’s call. We decided not to lead a session for the July ESIP meeting (although folks were kicking around the idea of co-organizing something) but kept open the idea of a poster instead. We decided there were enough core international folks on cluster that an in-person US-based meeting did not make sense for us and that we didn’t feel like there was significant progress to report from the cluster or a clear ask to the broader ESIP community. 

Next call we’ll continue to work through the manuscript, April 18th we’ll hear an update on GLOSIS from Luis de Sousa. As always, more notes are here: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C8MYnr2NWwNhoYTQ-2IXE0h0NfflF8zXEonpabY\_s8I/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C8MYnr2NWwNhoYTQ-2IXE0h0NfflF8zXEonpabY_s8I/edit?usp=sharing) 

Best,  
\-Kathe

**Agenda:**

* \[10 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[15 minutes\] – Do we want to [propose a July Session](https://docs.google.com/document/u/0/d/1wOlQIuVtoGDoGwW0ljopr1oQc_lWbmzB9FyeleCf1fk/edit)?  
* \[5 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*

Gary \- thoughts on degree of interoperability\!  
The ISCN data integration is majorly interested in layer level soil data 

Ideas on sessions proposal for the summer meeting:  
Steven- interested in soil sessions (use last year's workshop summary notes and then jump off from there). Last year ESIP July meeting output from Soils Session: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1njLQnye9-mLJgdmS6Rm4khKYmZHjn2JlVIC0PKeQe90/edit?usp=sharing)   
Megan- not sure at the moment   
Brandon- a session around on the needs of the community, think about the structure and involvement of people   
Gary- virtual session in january might make sense   
Gerbrand- virtual session is more ideal 

No one had particularly put forth any ideas for the July meeting but are more interested in January meeting which is going to be virtual  

KTB- thoughts on making a poster on cluster activities?   
Gary- looking for FAIR principles that could be applied to metadata and provide this in the paper for future work

Objective of ISCN- annotate the existing archived data and then squash the data together (essentially a data harmonization activity)

[https://vocab.nerc.ac.uk/collection/P01/current/TCO2KG01/](https://vocab.nerc.ac.uk/collection/P01/current/TCO2KG01/) (shared by Megan) 

See you all in two weeks\!   
GLOSIS \- Luis de Sousa will be presenting on 18 April, 2023\.

## 7 March 2023 2000 UTC

**Purpose:**  Org and updates  
**Recap:** We had a good conversation on presentations and the soil data model manuscript yesterday on call.   
**Agenda:**

* \[10 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[5 minutes\] – Updates on presentations to cluster  
* \[30 minutes\] \- Manuscript directions/revision  
  * \[5 minutes \- silent/solo\] read/review outline or draft  
  * \[5 minutes \- round the room\] First reaction that no one else has brought up yet  
  * \[20 minutes \- popcorn discussion\] Second reaction and/or discussion point  
* \[5 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*

KTB: Neat paper\! [Semantics about soil organic carbon storage: DATA4C+, a comprehensive thesaurus and classification of management practices in agriculture and forestry](https://soil.copernicus.org/articles/9/89/2023/)

Allison: field visits upcoming before the July meeting 

- Raskin Scholarship application is out 

Steven might share the soils data and then KTB and lab can think of integrating it with SOCDRaHR with annotations 

Cluster presentations: GloSIS in the pipeline (Louis in April?)

Soil Data Model Manuscript Review:  
[https://s2geometry.io/devguide/s2cell\_hierarchy.html](https://s2geometry.io/devguide/s2cell_hierarchy.html) 

KTB will work on soil organic carbon and will take a stab at best management practices on defining geolocations (like lat/long?) 

February 21, 2023 2000 UTC  
**Purpose:** Decisions \- presentations for next year and possible workflow project

**Recap:** Kicking back into gear from a sleepy winter we made some decisions today at the ESIP Soil ontology and informatics Cluster call. 

- We are bringing back the cluster seminars and presentations with specific asks of “How can we contribute” to the semantic resources and “What are you doing” to the data collections.  
- The Todd-Brown Lab would like to invite everyone here to our weekly soil data harmonization workflow working group. We are developing metadata annotations that will be fed into a scripted data integration workflow. We are currently annotating data sets and plan to have an Rmarkdown document to prototype the integration by May.  
- We are continuing (slowly) working through the Soil Measurement review paper. Expect presentations to alternate with working meetings again.

Unless we have a particularly enthusiastic presenter, our next meeting will be revisiting the manuscript.

See you in two weeks\!  
\-Kathe

**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[10 minutes\] \- Plan for next year   
  * \[Round\] Yes~~/No/Modification~~  
    * Invite the speakers from last year back in groups of two to give updates on their resources or data set. Shoot loosely for March-September.  
    * Modification: Ask to contribute to GLOSIS and ENVO; topical working meeting afterwards to explore contributions  
* \[20 minutes\] \- Data harmonization with SOC-DRaH  
  * Update by Kathe on the SOC-DRaH (ISCN) workflow: Operational meeting to develop annotations and workflow [Soil Data org document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1P1OytePIypwR-1a2WxqBA-bWjQo4SJBQWkeZbtmqhME/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * \[Round\] Yes/No/Modification  
    * Pair this with the soil measurement paper [https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a) for a practical grounding on any semantics; focus on the method vocabularies  
* \[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps  
  * Can we fill in the purpose statement at the top of the document?

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*  
Links of interest:

- Local Contexts: [https://localcontexts.org](https://localcontexts.org) \- KTB  
- 

Possible presenter list:  
? Open geospatial Consortium ?  
Draw on here [Soil collections and semantics - 1pagers](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1G3vUP82LfVenOYazK4687g9-rTUkLckGEm4nE04s3Ls/edit?usp=sharing) and [https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil\_semantic\_resources](https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources) 

| Category | Topic | Presenter |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Data model | [ODM2](https://github.com/ODM2/ODM2) | Emilio Mayorga (UWashington)  |
| Data model \+ soil vocabulary | [SOSA](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/), [SSN-EXT](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn-ext/) and [TERN Ontology](https://ternaustralia.github.io/ontology_tern/) | Simon Cox (CSIRO)  |
| Data model | [OBO](https://obofoundry.org/) and [ENVO](https://sites.google.com/site/environmentontology/) | Kai Blumberg (Woodwell Climate) Pierre B? |
| Data model \+ soil vocabulary | [GLOSIS](https://github.com/rapw3k/glosis) | Luís de Sousa (ISRIC) Raul, Kathi Schleidt (DataCove |
|  | INSPIRE | Kathi Schleidt (DataCove) |
| Soil dictionary | [SSSA \- Soil Glossary](https://www.soils.org/publications/soils-glossary/) | April Ulery (New Mexico SU) |
| Data model \+ soil vocabulary | Semantics for interoperability in ecosystem studies: the [AnaEE \- France Thesaurus](https://opendata.inra.fr/anaeeThes/page/) approach | Christian Pichot (INRAE) |
| Data model | [OGC O\&M](https://www.ogc.org/standards/om) | Kathi Schleidt (DataCove) |
| Data platform | [AgGateway WG04 and Modus](https://www.aggateway.org/News/2021Newsletters/2021AprilNewsletter/April2021WorkingGroupRound-Up.aspx) | Andres Ferrerya (AgGateway) |
| Vocabulary ontology | [Schema.org](https://schema.org/) | Adam Shepherd (WHOI) |
| Governance example | [CGI Geoscience Terminolog](http://geosciml.org/resource/def/voc/)y \- creation, governance and use. (Discussion \- cross-disciplinary learnings for the soils domain?) | Mark Rattenbury (GNS Science I Te Pῡ Ao.) Chair, CGI-IUGS Geoscience Terminology Working Group  |
| Database | [US Forest Service Forest Inventory Assessment](https://www.fia.fs.usda.gov/) | Erin Berryman (US Forest Service)  |
| Database | [USDA NRCS NCSS database](https://ncsslabdatamart.sc.egov.usda.gov/) | Skye Wills (USDA NRCS) or Dylan Beaudette (USDA NRCS) |
| Database \+ data rescue | [International Soil Radiocarbon Database](https://soilradiocarbon.org/) | Corey Lawrense (USGS) or Allison Hoyt (Stanford) |
| Database \+ data rescue | [Coastal Carbon Data Clearinghouse](https://serc.si.edu/coastalcarbon/data)  | Jim Holmquist (Smithsonian Institute) |
| Database \+ data rescue | [A Global Database of Soil Respiration Data, Version 5.0](https://daac.ornl.gov/SOILS/guides/SRDB_V5.html)  | Ben Bond-Lamberty (Pacific Northwest National Lab) |
| Database \+ data model | [*Aridec*](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6600345): [Database of aridlands decomposition studies](https://github.com/AgustinSarquis/aridec/tree/v1.0.2)  | Agustín Sarquis (IFEVA; CONICET-FAUBA)  |
| Database | *OSSL*  |  |
| Database | *Ag evidence* |  |
|  | AGRO*:* [Agronomy Ontology](https://obofoundry.org/ontology/agro.html) https://github.com/AgriculturalSemantics/agro | TBD |
| ESIP Cluster | Wildfires \- what soil data do you use and what does it look? |  |
|  | OGC Agro Information Model Working group (DEMETER)  |  |
|  | Global Soil Partnership \- GLOSLAN | TBD |
|  |  |  |

**Terminology**

- Data model: Defined a structure or data template appropriate for soil data  
- Soil vocabulary: List of terms and/or code lists related to soils  
- Soil dictionary: List of paired term-definitions  
- Data platform: Platform to archive, and search data collections related to soils  
- Vocabulary ontology: broader ontology of relevant variable terms  
- Database: integrated data collection with a single data model  
- Data rescue: integration of data from multiple sources in such a way that it can be easily translated into the same model

* Folks can join the weekly meetings for SOCDRaHR data harmonization work-flow by Dr. TB lab (Mondays, 1145 Eastern), we will be discussing the production pipeline for the datasets, coming up with annotations for metadata, creating R markdown files and finally merging them to ISCN \[it could potentially contribute to the soil methods paper\!\]  
* The ESIP wildfire group? Any thoughts? It must have a good amount of soil data   
* Using cluster calls to motivate everyone to work on the manuscript revisions and review, also give updates on soil measurements paper   
* [https://obofoundry.org/ontology/agro.html](https://obofoundry.org/ontology/agro.html) \- Agronomy ontology database [https://github.com/AgriculturalSemantics/agro](https://github.com/AgriculturalSemantics/agro) (Github repository for Agronomy semantics) 

We will be meeting next on Mar 7, 2023\. See you all at the next meeting\!

## January 10, 2023 2000 UTC

**Purpose:**  Kick off and introductions\!

**Recap:** In 2022 we met 20 times and heard from 10 different presenters on semantic resources (and have the YouTube recording to prove it\!) and two folks on soil data methods. We published one paper related to cluster activities [https://bg.copernicus.org/articles/19/3505/2022/](https://bg.copernicus.org/articles/19/3505/2022/) on how folks synthesize data and have started a second on semantics for soil data models. On the warm fuzzy side, our admittedly bias selection really liked how the ESIP Soil Cluster calls run with folks feeling that we did a good job balancing structure with social interactions and flow. There were several comments that folks always learned something new and interesting on call\!  
   
Moving forward into 2023 there was strong interest in pairing our current soil measurement paper with a data synthesis activity. This falls in line with the guidance out of the July meeting to pair semantic development with data synthesis to keep the semantics grounded in applications. We also want to synthesize some of the past presentations in to a blog post or infographic and invite these folks back to the cluster to give updates next year.

**Agenda:**

* \[20 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
    * ESIP Updates  
      * ESIP Meeting Info: [https://www.esipfed.org/meetings](https://www.esipfed.org/meetings)   
      * Annual Report: [https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.21809433](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.21809433)   
      * Sneak peek of RFP. Not officially opened until Jan 23: [https://www.esipfed.org/lab/funding-opportunities/2023-rfp](https://www.esipfed.org/lab/funding-opportunities/2023-rfp)   
* \[30 minutes \- rounds\] \- Retrospective and prospective  
  * What have we done well over the last year?  
  * What do we want to carry forward into 2023?  
  * What do we want to start fresh?  
* \[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*

* What have we done well over the last year?  
  * Good balance between organization/documentation and flow  
    * Great learning space and community involvement from diverse groups   
    * Interesting talks\!  
    * Integration with some of the other clusters  
    * We got a pub\!  
  * What do we want to carry forward into 2023? What do we want to start fresh?  
    * Blog post on synthesizing information from presentations last year  
    * Build a synthesis or data model  
    * Guidance on small synopsis describing data ? possible collab with Schema.org to improve discovery  
    * Update on USDA tillage data mining  
    * SoilVoc?   
    * Majorly dig in some data and build some annotations for the data from different sources, describing the variables and sampling of the various methodologies   
    * Continue moving forward with the manuscript (the data model paper)   
  * To-do: go back and check for an update from the presenters  

## Date and time \[UTC\]

**Purpose:**  *What is the purpose of this meeting? Folks can use this to decide if they need/want to attend. Fill this in first\!*  
**Recap:** *What are the key takeaways or decisions that were made? No more then 2-3 sentences. Copy/paste to mailing list and/or slack chanel to keep folks in the loop*  
**Agenda:**

* \[15 minutes\] \- Opening  
  * Attendance  [RollCalls](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  * Accept agenda \- anything that needs to change?  
  * Information \- Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share?  
* \[30 minutes\] – *other items to be set by the facilitator and accepted at the start of the meeting*  
  * *EXAMPLE of manuscript/journal club*  
    * \[10 minutes \- silent/solo\] read/review outline or draft  
    * \[5 minutes \- round the room\] First reaction that no one else has brought up yet  
    * \[20 minutes \- popcorn discussion\] Second reaction and/or discussion point  
  * *EXAMPLE of working/mentoring meeting*  
    * \[10 minute\] Project check-ins \- where are you at  
    * \[20 minutes\] Stuck to unstuck \- what do you need to move forward  
  * *EXAMPLE of seminar*  
    * \[20 minutes\] TITLE by PERSON AFFILIATION \- Recorded presentation  
    * \[5 minutes\] Recorded clarifying questions  
    * \[5 minutes\] Unrecorded open discussion  
* \[10 minutes\] Recap/next steps

**Notes:** *Group notes document led by identified note taker that has more details. Less important to capture who said what and more important to capture general feel of the discussion and any agreements that were made*

# Introductions {#introductions}

* ***Name (Affiliation/Location):** How do you see yourself related to soil ontology/informations? Why are you here? What are you looking to get out of this group?*  
    
* **Kathe Todd-Brown (University of Florida, Gainesville):** I’m a computational biogeochemist who builds simulations of how soil breathes and links up data to challenge these simulations. I’m interested in building semantic resources to support linking data together and linking data models. I strongly believe that these resources need to be built by a community rather than an individual to both make better tools and encourage adoption. I cofounded this Cluster and have been shamelessly using it as a test bed for how to build better research communities.

