# 2024 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster

2023-12-31

- [Group purpose statement](#group-purpose-statement)
- [Call in information](#call-in-information)
- [Resources](#resources)
  - [Resources generated by the
    cluster](#resources-generated-by-the-cluster)
  - [Cluster history](#cluster-history)
  - [Relevant links:](#relevant-links)
- [Contacts:](#contacts)
- [Revisit these ideas:](#revisit-these-ideas)
- [Meeting and communication notes:](#meeting-and-communication-notes)
  - [23 October 2024 1200 Eastern](#23-october-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [25 September 2024 1200 Eastern](#25-september-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [28 August 2024 1200 Eastern](#28-august-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [\[CANCELED\] 24 July 2024 1200
    Eastern](#canceled-24-july-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [26 June 2024 1200 Eastern](#26-june-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [22 May 2024 1200 Eastern](#22-may-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [24 April 2024 1200 Eastern](#24-april-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [27 March 2024 1200 Eastern](#27-march-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [28 February 2024 1200 Eastern](#28-february-2024-1200-eastern)
  - [Meeting date and time with
    timezone](#meeting-date-and-time-with-timezone)
  - [Descriptive title of com
    summary](#descriptive-title-of-com-summary)
- [Introductions](#introductions)
- [Glossary](#glossary)
- [Organizational resource list](#organizational-resource-list)
- [License, dissemination, and
  copyright](#license-dissemination-and-copyright)

# Group purpose statement

The purpose of The Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster is to provide a
community of practice to coordinate the development of soil informatics
best practices and resources.

To do this we will

- Meet regularly to exchange updates on related projects (for example
  SOC-DRaH <https://github.com/ISCN/SOCDRaHR2> ) and announce
  opportunities for community involvement.  
- Develop synthesis manuscripts and resources on the current state of
  practice (past example:
  <https://bg.copernicus.org/articles/19/3505/2022/bg-19-3505-2022-discussion.html>,
  [Current soil data
  landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing)
  )  
- Propose modifications or additions to existing ontologies and semantic
  resources to better support soil data discovery and harmonization.

Goals for 2024:

- \[June 2024\] Complete the current manuscript draft evaluating current
  soil semantic resources for the purpose of data harmonization
  workflows  
- \[August 2024\] develop a plan to propose modifications to a specific
  semantic or ontology resource  
- \[October 2024\] Include regular updates from at least three soil data
  projects in meetings and expand attendance our regular cluster calls.

Term - reevaluate October 2024

# Call in information

**The meetings listed here should be reflected in the ESIP calendar**  
[**https://www.esipfed.org/community-calendar/**](https://www.esipfed.org/community-calendar/)

**Meetings will be every 4th Wednesday of the month at 1200 US-Eastern**

Asynchronous participation is encouraged

- ESIP slack channel \#soil-info.
  <https://esip-slack-invite.herokuapp.com/>  
- <http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics>

# Resources

- Webpage: <https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/collaborate/soil>  
- Mailing list (recaps and announcements primarily, low traffic)
  <http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics>  
- Slack \#soil-info on esip-all.slack.com
  <https://join.slack.com/t/esip-all/shared_invite/zt-1kxf7dlbr-Pmo_31FwJlpNNSl5MtOPMA>

## Resources generated by the cluster

- Reference list: [Current soil data
  landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing)  
- YouTube channel:
  <https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5_i8iJW_fzrdsUBR6cBs3LT5Tz>  
- Github presentation recaps:
  <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources> \[Note: plans
  to transfer to ESIP after draft phase\]  
- Soil data paper (request permissions from Kathe Todd-Brown \<\>)
  <https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a>

## Cluster history

Initial documents:

- Cluster proposal: [ESIP Soil Ontology and Informatics Clustering
  proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wyplA7K7IHIY_yPXTydfFYNTwiXyrZY2R_9lu3LjRhk/edit?usp=sharing)  
- Cluster purpose:
  [SoilOnt-Purpose](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Fx4B1oLamhacp-bujAL2UrKaTBcSe_gGocaOUYJ_zpA/edit?usp=sharing)

No longer active

- Cluster wiki page:
  <https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil_Ontologies_and_Informatics>

Past year cluster notes:

- [2023 Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster - Meeting
  Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C8MYnr2NWwNhoYTQ-2IXE0h0NfflF8zXEonpabY_s8I/edit?usp=sharing)  
- [2022 Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster - Meeting
  Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12OtoXo6YV4zK9a79VeJK8XE7iEf02hF9Uf-ggQ8YlG4/edit?usp=sharing)  
- [2021 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP
  Cluster](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing)  
- [2020 Soil ontology - Notes and
  Agend](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1w3ScPH6tZCIRcKFiP-BYCa1UihYPei0aL0PcvandV4c/edit?usp=sharing)

## Relevant links:

Main folder:  
[ESIP SOI -
RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) -
Add your name and write “here” under the current date. Please also
scroll down and add a brief
[Introduction](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C8MYnr2NWwNhoYTQ-2IXE0h0NfflF8zXEonpabY_s8I/edit#heading=h.ermsffl4ckxm)
below the notes and recaps.

=========== Templates ====================  
Decision log book: [Decision log
template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ncEDlVYsFJu9oubyj8I2kJL7KiaClttOSkVqzxWywLk/edit?usp=sharing)  
Performance reviews: [Individual Review
Template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uqonOb-8ktLFf1ZEuF2dBvbbQ3duYUxiJ9jyjfWB3Xo/edit?usp=sharing)  
Milestones and deliverables: [Milestones and deliverables
template](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/10ZmjN-3qJb9CGDUU01fTrkYf741iv7_uVODnhTVWbP8/edit?usp=sharing)  
Governance document: [Governance Agreement
\[template\]](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11Z__hJNt53ayMBEz8BRbPW3GkoYl-Oh0GGAqHpxOmy4/edit?usp=sharing)
\[\[under active development\]\]  
Git repository for codebase:  
Manuscript draft:

# Contacts:

[ESIP SOI -
RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) -
Add your name and write “here” under the current date. Please also
scroll down and add a brief
[Introduction](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C8MYnr2NWwNhoYTQ-2IXE0h0NfflF8zXEonpabY_s8I/edit#heading=h.ermsffl4ckxm)
below the notes and recaps.

**Core decision team (points of contact)**: Kathe Todd-Brown

# Revisit these ideas:

- [ ] Who else needs to be on core decision team?  
- [ ] Common challenges with soil data harmonization  
- [ ] Spatial coverage of soil data  
- [ ] Recap July meeting in August  
- [ ] \[Date\] Nifty idea

# Meeting and communication notes:

*Each meeting needs an agenda that includes times, notes, and a recap.
Recaps should be circulated after the meeting is concluded and include a
description of discussion including any major decisions (limit to ~100
words, refer to notes or new policy if needed).*

## 23 October 2024 1200 Eastern

**Recap**: Today, we began with a discussion on papers and proposals
people are working on. We decided to restrict to individual
presentations for the upcoming Jan Meeting 2025. We finalized on having
presentations from folks working on informatics tools in spring 2025. We
will meet again for a close-out meeting on November 14, 2024, 12:00 PM
Eastern to reflect back on this year’s past sessions. You can find a
tentative agenda and detailed notes here:
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wj4fbPuTAidrdlAHzW16iJUo49KO0JcQCrgMkqXDL-M/edit?usp=sharing>.

**Agenda:**

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling - - Note taking? - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 10 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[<https://feelingswheel.com/> excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] *Pass is always fine!* |
|  |  | ————–————–——–No notes—————————————- |
| 15 | 10 | **FYI**: Call for information Any papers or proposal calls that would be of interest to the group? |
|  |  | ESIP General Announcements! Nominations for ESIP Awards open until Oct. 31: <https://www.esipfed.org/awards/?mc_cid=95c98f0462> Call for January ESIP Meeting 2025 (Virtual) Sessions is open (until Nov. 14): <https://docs.google.com/document/d/185NdsswmRnFCupnBVrpZ_HDdnJ8BvaVXpLueTUHHW-M/edit?tab=t.0> |
| 25 | 10 | **Updates:** What are folks in the room currently working on that they wish to share? |
|  |  | Python package for post-processing of eddy covariance datasets Incorporating AI to daily research workflows Ingesting C-PEAT collection into Soil-DraH workflow |
| 35 | 10 | **ESIP January:** Do we want to organize a session? |
|  |  | Nope, maybe just posters/demos |
| 45 | 5 | **Formulation**: What topics do we want to hear about next spring/summer? Who should we invite to speak on those topics? Who is taking point? |
|  |  | Focus on informatics tools for spring Possibly scaffold the seminar series - based on foundational concepts query to the presenters Prime presenters with data relation/locaiton - aspects - vocabulary based on SoilDRaH \*\*\*Notes from last time Informatics tools [GloSIS](https://www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/glosis-global-soil-information-system-web-ontology) Luis de Sosa [Observations, Measurements, and Samples - Open Geospatial Consortium](https://www.ogc.org/standard/om/) Kathi S ENVO Peter B ESIP Semantic Harmonization - Science on Schema.org Ask Brandon for rec Large monitoring databases USDA-NRCS SURRGO and NCSS USDA-FS FIA Database Data networks [PSInet: A new global water potential network](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39190893/) Kimberly Novick (PsiNet) OpenET, Ameriflux network Housen Chu (Ameriflux) ISRIC FAO-GSP CPEAT Coastal Carbon DB ESIP Open Science ESIP Physical Samples - Large list of citations |
| 50 | 2 | **Formulation:** Can we have one close out meeting in November/December? |
|  |  | November 14, same time? |
| 55 | 3 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… \[ToDo items, gratitudes, appreciations, and discoveries\] |
|  |  |  |

## 25 September 2024 1200 Eastern

**Recap**:Today, we began with a discussion on relevant papers or
proposal calls that would be of interest to the group. We broadly
divided these into 3 categories (Informatics tools, Large monitoring
databases, and Data networks) from which we will be inviting speakers in
future cluster calls. Our next meeting is scheduled for 12:00 PM Eastern
on October 23, 2024 to decide on potential speakers and presentation
outline. You can find a tentative agenda and detailed notes here:
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wj4fbPuTAidrdlAHzW16iJUo49KO0JcQCrgMkqXDL-M/edit?usp=sharing>.

**Agenda:**

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling - 23-October - Note taking? - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 10 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[<https://feelingswheel.com/> excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] Name, institution, why you are here, what would your 12 year old self think of what you do now? How are you showing up? *Pass is always fine!* |
|  |  | ————–————–——–No notes—————————————- |
| 15 | 10 | **FYI**: Call for information Any papers or proposal calls that would be of interest to the group? |
|  |  | Proposal Call \[Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) |
| 25 | 10 | **Updates:** What are folks in the room currently working on that they wish to share? |
|  |  | Daniel Segessenman - Devonian Geochemistry Vaasuki - Variable Mapping across datasets Daniel Smith - Verification of remote sensing and field measurements <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH> - holding bi-weekly calls to develop the repository |
| 35 | 5 | **Formulation**: What topics do we want to hear about over the next few months? |
|  |  | Informatics tools [GloSIS](https://www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/glosis-global-soil-information-system-web-ontology) [Observations, Measurements, and Samples - Open Geospatial Consortium](https://www.ogc.org/standard/om/) ENVO ESIP Semantic Harmonization - Science on Schema.org Large monitoring databases USDA-NRCS SURRGO and NCSS USDA-FS FIA Database Data networks [PSInet: A new global water potential network](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39190893/) OpenET, Ameriflux network ISRIC FAO-GSP CPEAT Coastal Carbon DB ESIP Open Science ESIP Physical Samples - Large list of citations |
| 40 | 10 | **Formulation:** Who should we invite to speak on those topics? |
|  |  | Kimberly Novick (PsiNet) Housen Chu (Ameriflux) |
| 50 | 5 | **To do**: Who is going to write the invitations? |
|  |  |  |
| 55 | 5 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… \[ToDo items, gratitudes, appreciations, and discoveries\] |
|  |  |  |

## 28 August 2024 1200 Eastern

**Recap**: Today, we began with brief introductions and highlights from
the ESIP July meeting. We covered updates on Soil-DRaH and the soil
ontology manuscript. We also brainstormed future focus areas, deciding
to split our 1-hour slot into three 20-minute segments: project updates,
an external speaker, and open discussion. Our next meeting is scheduled
for 12:00 PM Eastern on September 25, 2024, to review Soil-DRaH,
manuscripts, and potential speakers. You can find a tentative agenda and
detailed notes here:
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wj4fbPuTAidrdlAHzW16iJUo49KO0JcQCrgMkqXDL-M/edit?usp=sharing>.

**Agenda**:

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling - Note taking? - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 10 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[[https://www.nycnvc.org/feelings](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ca4f4d1523958120344a27f/t/5cdc22080852297d846864f2/1557930505040/feelings.pdf) excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] Name, institute, research topic or expertise, what food do you like to cook/eat? *Pass is always fine!* |
|  |  | ————–————–——–No notes—————————————- |
| 15 | 10 | **Recap**: July Meeting What happened in the July meeting? What do we want to do for January? |
|  |  | Governance also includes text stacks, hierarchical policy development Different styles of decision making (consent) ML as investigatory tool Missing a session on application of semantics for harmonization |
| 25 | 15 | **Evaluation:** How has this format worked over the last 6 months? We tried to combine updates with open discussion focused on common hurdles in data harmonization work. Round 1: What worked well? Round 2: What didn’t work well? |
|  |  | R1: Tangible/actionable items/plans; Project updates are crucial R2: Tracking projects has difficult |
| 40 | 15 | **Formulation**: What do we want to do over the next 6 months? |
|  |  | SoilDRaH & manuscript completion Actional items are good! Updates and external speakers are good to get new idea’s injected in |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |
|  |  | Final takeaway: 20 mins (Updates) + 20 mins (Speakers) + 20 mins (Open discussion) Next call will focus on who to invite for speaker slots |
| 55 | 5 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… \[ToDo items, gratitudes, appreciations, and discoveries\] |
|  |  |  |

## \[CANCELED\] 24 July 2024 1200 Eastern

The July meeting is canceled due to ESIP

## 26 June 2024 1200 Eastern

**Recap:**  
**Agenda:**

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling - Note taking? Mike - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 10 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[[https://www.nycnvc.org/feelings](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ca4f4d1523958120344a27f/t/5cdc22080852297d846864f2/1557930505040/feelings.pdf) excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] Name, institute, research topic or expertise, what food do you like to cook/eat? *Pass is always fine!* |
|  |  | ————–————–——–No notes—————————————- |
| 15 | 15 | **Updates from ongoing projects:** Soil-DRaH, a soil harmonization workflow <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH> \[Kathe Todd-Brown\] ISRaD \[Jeff B-M/Sophie vF\] <https://soilradiocarbon.org/> ISCN4 profiles of soil carbon density \[Vaasuki Marupaka\] Soil ontology paper <https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a> \[Brandon Whitehead\] Hawai’i incubation and greenhouse gas data \[Hayley P-C\] Synthesizing Warming Experiments to Depth Data Integration Effort (SWEDDIE) / DeepSoil2100 \[Jeff Beem-Miller\] <https://iscn.fluxdata.org/network/partner-networks/deepsoil2100/> Alaska soil data compilation \[Nic Jelinski\] |
|  |  | Soil-DRaH: Gotten a workflow in place for merging data sources together now! Lab looking into projects/needs in the broader ecosystem now Starting with the standard data sets, looking to broaden to support bespoke data sets moving forward |
| 30 | 3 | **Discussion:** How to think about harmonization when everyone wants their data to be a ‘special snowflake’? |
|  |  | Soil-DRaH expects that there’s a need to specifically, manually build support out for every unique research data set Soilhive is hoping to be enough of a value-add that producers are willing to “own the pain” of complying with a standard Other domains sometimes have the benefit of a standard being enforced from the top-down (by funders, or by particularly important data producers) but not much of an equivalent for soil |
| 33 | 3 |  |
|  |  |  |
| 36 | 14 | **Discussion**: What information do you look for in annotations/metadata for a scripted data workflow approach? Is there a specific data model that you use? |
|  |  | <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH/wiki/Workflow-for-new-data-addition> \<- workflow under consideration for SoilDRaH Define what a “Data Model” is? Additional information would help. |
| 50 | 5 | **Backlog**: What should we be talking about in the next 2-4 meetings? |
|  |  | Invite speakers (soil matric potential, evapotranspiration) Future directions/Recap that ESIP Soil Ontology Paper |
| 55 | 5 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… \[ToDo items, gratitudes, appreciations, and curiosities\] |
|  |  |  |

## 22 May 2024 1200 Eastern

**Recap**: Today we started with introductions and updates for
Soil-DRaH, and ISCN4 projects. There was a deep dive into the proposed
workflow for new data addition for the Soil-DRaH project. We also
brainstormed on topics that we should be focusing on in the future, some
of which includes - inviting speakers from soil hydrology, having
dedicated discussion on directions for the cluster in terms of ESIP
objectives, and a discussion on the soil ontology paper. We are meeting
again in a month (1200 Eastern - 26th June, 2024) to check in on these
projects again and continue our conversation. A tentative agenda is on
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wj4fbPuTAidrdlAHzW16iJUo49KO0JcQCrgMkqXDL-M/edit?usp=sharing>
and you can also find more detailed notes there.

**Agenda**:

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling - Note taking? Debasish - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 10 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[[https://www.nycnvc.org/feelings](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ca4f4d1523958120344a27f/t/5cdc22080852297d846864f2/1557930505040/feelings.pdf) excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] Name, institute, research topic or expertise, what food do you like to cook/eat? *Pass is always fine!* |
|  |  | ————–————–——–No notes—————————————- |
| 15 | 3 | **Updates** Soil-DRaH, a soil harmonization workflow <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH> \[Kathe Todd-Brown\] |
|  |  | Rebooting old archives into new one Workflow diagram Working on 3 datasets (FS-FIADB, ISCN3, C-PEAT) |
| 18 | 3 | **~~Updates~~** ~~ISRaD \[Jeff B-M/Sophie vF\] <https://soilradiocarbon.org/>~~ |
|  |  |  |
| 21 | 3 | **Updates** ISCN4 profiles of soil carbon density \[Vaasuki Marupaka\] |
|  |  | Soil carbon related variables Current datasets being ingested: ISCN3 datasets (~28 datasets) FS-FIADB (forest service- forest inventory analysis) C-PEAT (peat carbon data on Pangaea) USDA NRCS-NCSS data ingest |
| 24 | 3 | **Updates** Soil ontology paper <https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a> \[Brandon Whitehead\]: |
|  |  |  |
| 27 | 3 | **~~Updates~~** ~~Hawai’i incubation and greenhouse gas data \[Hayley P-C\]~~ |
|  |  |  |
| 30 | 3 | **Updates** Alaska soil data compilation \[Nic Jelinski\] |
|  |  | Additional Data Sources Ingestion |
| 33 | 3 | **~~Updates~~** ~~Synthesizing Warming Experiments to Depth Data Integration Effort (SWEDDIE) / DeepSoil2100 \[Jeff Beem-Miller\] <https://iscn.fluxdata.org/network/partner-networks/deepsoil2100/>~~ |
|  |  |  |
| 36 | 14 | **Discussion**: What information do you look for in annotations/metadata for a scripted data workflow approach? Is there a specific data model that you use? |
|  |  | <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH/wiki/Workflow-for-new-data-addition> \<- workflow under consideration for SoilDRaH Define what a “Data Model” is? Additional information would help. |
| 50 | 5 | **Backlog**: What should we be talking about in the next 2-4 meetings? |
|  |  | Invite speakers (soil matric potential, evapotranspiration) Future directions/Recap that ESIP Soil Ontology Paper |
| 55 | 5 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… \[ToDo items, gratitudes, appreciations, and curiosities\] |
|  |  |  |

**Terminologies/Ideas**

- Data Model  
- Data Architecture

## 24 April 2024 1200 Eastern

**Recap**: Today we started with introductions and updates for a number
of different data aggregation projects including: Soil-DRaH, ISRaD,
ISCN4, and SWEDDIE. We discussed the possibility of a SOI session for
the July meeting but decided to hold off until January in favor of a
virtual session. There was a deep dive into fixing/working with metadata
tables (annotations) for Soil-DRaH and associated challenges. We are
meeting again in a month (1200 Eastern - 22nd May, 2024) to check in on
these projects again and continue our conversation. A tentative agenda
is on
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wj4fbPuTAidrdlAHzW16iJUo49KO0JcQCrgMkqXDL-M/edit?usp=sharing>
and you can also find more detailed notes there.

Agenda:

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling - May 22 - Note taking? Debasish - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 10 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[[https://www.nycnvc.org/feelings](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ca4f4d1523958120344a27f/t/5cdc22080852297d846864f2/1557930505040/feelings.pdf) excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] AND/OR What is something you’re really good at doing in your non-professional work? *Pass is always fine!* |
|  |  | ————–————–——–No notes—————————————- |
| 15 | 3 | **Updates** Soil-DRaH, a soil harmonization workflow <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH> \[Kathe Todd-Brown\] |
|  |  | Template (R Markdown) - finalized, and is being demoed Workshop in June |
| 18 | 3 | **Updates** ISRaD \[Jeff B-M ~~Sophie vF~~\] <https://soilradiocarbon.org/> |
|  |  | Planning to have a mini hackathon sometime this year Mostly work on code issues No agenda as yet If anyone is interested, reach out to Jeff! A small workshop before AGU this year Planned workshop before EGU next year |
| 21 | 3 | **Updates** ISCN4 profiles of soil carbon density \[Vaasuki Marupaka\] |
|  |  | Work in progress for the manuscript |
| 24 | 3 | **Updates** Soil ontology paper <https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a> \[Brandon Whitehead\]: |
|  |  | Biweekly meetings over the summer |
| 27 | 3 | **~~Updates~~** ~~Hawai’i incubation and greenhouse gas data \[Hayley P-C\]~~ |
|  |  |  |
| 30 | 3 | **Updates** Alaska soil data compilation \[Nic Jelinski\] |
|  |  | Additional Data Sources Ingestion |
| 33 | 3 | **Updates** Synthesizing Warming Experiments to Depth Data Integration Effort (SWEDDIE) / DeepSoil2100 \[Jeff Beem-Miller\] <https://iscn.fluxdata.org/network/partner-networks/deepsoil2100/> |
|  |  | Annotations for metadata Challenges - size of the data (time series with gaps) Building functions for time series gap filling? |
|  |  | **ESIP JULY** |
|  |  | Possible dueling hackathon for SWEDDIE and Soil-DRaH Pinned for January connect with SWEET to talk soil Kathe will drop in slack Posters! Kathe, Debasish |
| 36 | 19 | **Discussion**: What information do you look for in annotations/metadata for a scripted data workflow approach? Is there a specific data model that you use? |
|  |  | Annotation table - struggling with data type column! Change from wide to long format (for example, table id, data variable, variable type, units) |
| 55 | 5 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… AND/OR What new thing did you learn about someone else (or a project) on the call today? |
|  |  |  |

## 27 March 2024 1200 Eastern

**Recap:** Today we started with introductions and updates for a number
of different data aggregation projects including: Soil-DRaH, ISRaD,
ISCN4, AKSDB, Hawai’i incubation and greenhouse gas data, soil warming
experiments and soil ontology paper. It was wonderful to hear about the
variety of approaches and measurement focus. There was interest in
continuing this format next month. We are meeting again in a month (1200
Eastern - 24th April, 2024) to check in on these projects again and
continue our conversation. A tentative agenda is on
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wj4fbPuTAidrdlAHzW16iJUo49KO0JcQCrgMkqXDL-M/edit?usp=sharing>
and you can also find more detailed notes there.

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling - April 24th - Note taking? Debasish - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 10 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[[https://www.nycnvc.org/feelings](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ca4f4d1523958120344a27f/t/5cdc22080852297d846864f2/1557930505040/feelings.pdf) excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] AND/OR \[\[week’s prompt question\]\] |
|  |  | ——–No notes————– |
| 15 | 3 | **Updates** Soil-DRaH, a soil harmonization workflow <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH> \[Kathe Todd-Brown\] |
|  |  | 3rd generation of a data harmonization workflow Currently finalizing a ‘dummy data’ workflow Download + annotations =\> scripts =\> curated data product Will roll into ISCN4 |
| 18 | 3 | **Updates** ISRaD \[Alison H/Sophie vF/Corey L\] <https://soilradiocarbon.org/> |
|  |  | Achieved - R package Work in progress - Adding Templates, challenge with getting data providers to fill in the template Objectives - Trying to establish benchmarking tool for C models, Development of new data products Moving forward - Need to acquire funding, release of ISRad 2.0, bring in new minds |
| 21 | 3 | **Updates** ISCN4 profiles of soil carbon density \[Vaasuki Marupaka\] |
|  |  | Workflow Framework - annotation (units, variables, and other metadata) Building functions Developing prototype Currently working on framing our methods section for the manuscript; developing a codebase with read functions for the datasets from ISCN3 (International Soil Carbon Network), FIADB (Forest Service - Forest Inventory Analysis Database), USDA-NRCS(National Cooperative Soil Survey - NCSS) , and C-PEAT (Carbon in Peat on Earth through Time). Shooting for the end of spring to have the methods and analysis completed for the paper. |
| 24 | 3 | **Updates** Soil ontology paper <https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a> \[Brandon Whitehead\]: |
|  |  | Semantics paper available (where to look for metadata, domain specific models, references for different database, and how references matches up with the details) Highlight the gaps in existing data harmonization |
| 27 | 3 | **Updates** Hawai’i incubation and greenhouse gas data \[Hayley P-C\] |
|  |  | -finished retrieving all S Crow lab data (soil carbon and greenhouse data) -annotated metadata during the data offload -started formatting soil incubation data in yaml -unable to proceed until I pull the HI climate data (MAT & MAP) |
| 30 | 3 | **Updates** Alaska soil data compilation \[Nic Jelinski\] |
|  |  | Acquire, curate, and centralize soil data (non-NRCS legacy data) for Alaska (\>80% of undamped lands in Alaska) - Alaska Soil Data Bank (AKSDB) Develop data dictionary and crosswalk terms Developing Tiered geospatial confidence ranking About 14,000 observations acquired so far (~9000 non-duplicate) Quarto e-book in preparation (<https://alaska-soil-data-bank.github.io/project-metadata/> ) |
| 33 | 3 | **Updates** Soil warming experiment compilation \[Jeff Beem-Miller\] Subsoil Warming Experiment Data Integration Effort (SWEDIE) <https://iscn.fluxdata.org/network/partner-networks/deepsoil2100/> |
|  |  | Synthesize past data on soil warming (\> 20-30 cm depth) Looking for new data bases Period of record requested - at least 1 year? Hybrid approach - Core database structure (site characters, exp. Design, etc.) + Translation approach (new datasets) To do: Data Dictionary |
| 36 | 19 | **Discussion**: ~~Do you have any questions to the folks who are presented today?~~ Did this format work well? Would a follow up in April be worth your time? |
|  |  | Similarities in tagging features across projects New connections How similar challenges are solved by others |
| 55 | 5 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… AND/OR \[\[Reflection question\]\] - *Are there any soil data/ontology projects that want to give updates?* |
|  |  |  |

**Terminologies/Ideas**

- yaml  
- Database vs. data bank  
- Data Dictionary

## 28 February 2024 1200 Eastern

**Recap:** Today we kicked off the 2024 ESIP Soil Ontology cluster call!
We brainstormed some topics of discussion for future calls that include:
common challenges with data harmonization, harmonization workflow
examples, reviews of soil informatics domain models, and analysis of
data coverage of networks/data-products. In addition, we heard updates
from some soil data projects including Soil-DRaH, ISCN4, and Hawai’i
GHG. We are meeting again in a month and looking forward to future
updates from ISRaD and hearing about Alaska soil data compilations.

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling (March 27th) - Note taking? Debasish - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 5 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[[https://www.nycnvc.org/feelings](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ca4f4d1523958120344a27f/t/5cdc22080852297d846864f2/1557930505040/feelings.pdf) excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] |
|  |  | ——–No notes————– |
| 10 | 5 | **Information** - Welcome! Review purpose statement Orientate to the document Invitation to introduction at the bottom *Round: Any clarifying questions or reactions?* |
|  |  |  |
| 15 | 10 | **Introductions** Name, affiliation Who are you and what are you hoping to get out of this group? AND/OR Name something that you didn’t used to like but that you do like now. How did that happen? |
|  |  |  |
| 25 | 3 | **Updates** from SOIL-DRaH <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH> \[Kathe\] |
|  |  | SOC-DRAH2 is exploring rebooting as SOIL-DRaH. We have finalized the prototype and are working on refactoring the codebase as well as streamlining the documentation/workflow. Deadline to have alpha version for new student testers is mid March. |
| 28 | 3 | **Updates** ISCN4 profiles of soil carbon density \[Vaasuki M\] |
|  |  | Currently working on framing our methods section for the manuscript; developing a codebase with read functions for the datasets from ISCN3, FIADB, USDA-NRCS(NCSS), and C-PEAT. Shooting for the end of spring to have the methods and analysis completed for the paper. |
| – | 0 | **Updates** Soil ontology paper \[Brandon W\]: |
|  |  |  |
| 34 | 3 | **Updates** Hawai’i incubation and greenhouse gas data \[Hayley P-C\] |
|  |  | Updating sidB incubation database with missing Susan Crow lab data. Pulled all missing datasets together; formatting in yaml for upload to sidB. Haven’t started pulling GHG data yet; slated for March 15th. |
| – | 0 | **Updates** Alaska SOC data compilation \[Nic J\] |
|  |  |  |
| – | 0 | **Updates** Soil warming experiment compilation \[Jeff B-M\] - pinned for next month |
|  |  |  |
| – | 0 | **Updates** ISRaD \[Allison H/Sophia vF/Corey L\] - pinned for next month |
|  |  |  |
| 40 | 15 | **Formulation**: What are some discussion topics we want to cover this year? |
|  |  | Invite folks from archives/repositories to discuss their soil data holdings and identify priority harmonization candidates Invite folks with large networks build around soil observations Kimberly A Novick (Indiana University Bloomington) \[<https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm23/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/1251828>\] Data repository options Example workflows for soil data harmonization CC-RCN Discuss common challenges with data harmonization Spatial coverage of data: identify areas of sparse data for future measurement campaigns Integration with other ESIP clusters Review formalized semantics for soil data domain descriptions GloSIS/INSPIRE More general ontology/semantic description of data |
| 55 | 5 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… |
|  |  |  |

## Meeting date and time with timezone

**Purpose:** *What is the purpose of this meeting? Folks can use this to
decide if they need/want to attend. Could be dropped if attendance is
expected.*

**Recap:** *100 words or less, what did we talk about?*

[Agenda
templates](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1abKp5AORYx5k5O_5xGw9xLi5t5wWs-8xObceFeSRyNs/edit?usp=sharing) -
*Create a template for your common meeting purposes and copy/paste them
into your document. You can also refer to the templates in here that
include: seminars, journal clubs, small group meetings, interconnected
circle meetings, group policy development, and reviews.*

|  | Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|----|
| 00 | 5 | **Opening** - Review and consent to the agenda - Next meeting scheduling (March 27th) - Note taking? Debasish - Who is here: [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
|  |  |  |
| 05 | 10 | **Check in**: Showing up… \[[https://www.nycnvc.org/feelings](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ca4f4d1523958120344a27f/t/5cdc22080852297d846864f2/1557930505040/feelings.pdf) excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] AND/OR \[\[week’s prompt question\]\] |
|  |  | ——–No notes————– |
| 15 | 3 | **Updates** Soil-DRaH, a soil harmonization workflow <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/SoilDRaH> \[Kathe Todd-Brown\] |
|  |  |  |
| 18 | 3 | **Updates** ISCN4 profiles of soil carbon density \[Vaasuki Marupaka\] |
|  |  |  |
| 21 | 3 | **Updates** Soil ontology paper <https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a> \[Brandon Whitehead\]: |
|  |  |  |
| 24 | 3 | **Updates** Hawai’i incubation and greenhouse gas data \[Hayley P-C\] |
|  |  |  |
| 27 | 3 | **Updates** Alaska SOC data compilation \[Nic Jelinski\] |
|  |  |  |
| 30 | 3 | **Updates** Soil warming experiment compilation \[Jeff B-M\] |
|  |  |  |
| 33 | 3 | **Updates** ISRaD \[Allison H/Sophia vF/Corey L\] |
|  |  |  |
| 36 | 19 | **Discussion**: |
|  |  |  |
| 55 | 5 | **Check out** - Leaving this meeting with… AND/OR \[\[Reflection question\]\] |
|  |  |  |

## Descriptive title of com summary

**Date:** *Day of communication or summary generation*  
**Point of contact:** *person to direct questions to*

*Some communications (emails often) are of general interest to the
circle but not discussed in meetings. Place summaries of these
communications here in the note document within the timeline of the
meeting agendas and notes. Remember to provide both the context of the
communication as well as the relevant outcomes/information.*

# Introductions

*Who are you? What is your affiliation? Why are you here and what can
you offer?*

**Kathe Todd-Brown** I’m an assistant professor at the University of
Florida where my research focuses on computational biogeochemisty,
specifically soil carbon cycling. I’ve been chairing this cluster for
several years and am really excited to geek out about soil semantics and
how they can be leveraged to connect data.

**Gerbrand Koren**: assistant professor at Utrecht University,
Netherlands. My research focuses on carbon cycling through
soil-vegetation-atmosphere. Interested in learning about data and
improving findability and interoperability of data.

**Debasish Mishra**: PhD student at Biological & Agricultural
Engineering Department, Texas A&M university. My research interests are
remote sensing of soil hydrology, and land-atmosphere coupling. I am
serving the cluster fellow and I wish to learn more about data
harmonization and useful resources for the soil community in general,
and soil hydrology community in specific.

**Jeff Beem-Miller:** Postdoctoral researcher jointly at the University
of Michigan Institute for Global Change Biology and the Climate and
Ecosystem Sciences Division of the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. Currently working on building a database for a global
synthesis of ecosystem warming experiments, focused on those with
measured warming extending into the subsoil (\< 0.2 m). My previous
experience with soil databases includes helping launch ISRaD (currently
the R package maintainer) and SIDb.

# Glossary

Harmonization -

# Organizational resource list

- Todd-Brown Lab organizational template: \[Logistics and notes
  template\]
  <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wnq-LWkG3b6fnLg9EXKGrXasbc3lH0zud0Qe0QUy0Js/edit?usp=sharing>  
- Governance
  - Who Decides Who Decides: ​​How to start a group so everyone can have a
    voice! (2021) Ted Rau
    <https://www.sociocracyforall.org/who-decides-who-decides/>  
  - Community Rules: Simple Templates for Great Communities (2021)
    Cassandra Dana, Drew Hornbein, Vincent Russell, and Nathan
    Schneider. \[booklet and citation\]
    <https://www.colorado.edu/lab/medlab/2021/07/15/community-rules-simple-templates-great-communities>.
    \[website\] <https://communityrule.info/>  
- Hosting one-off events
  - The Art of Gathering: How We Meet and Why It Matters (2018) Priya
    Parker <https://www.priyaparker.com/book-art-of-gathering>  
  - Guide to organizing Inclusive Science Meetings from 500 Women
    Scientists (no date, vs 1.2)
    <https://500womenscientists.org/inclusive-scientific-meetings>  
- Meeting structures
  - The Surprising Power of Liberating Structures: Simple Rules to
    Unleash A Culture of Innovation (2014) Keith McCandless and Henri
    Lipmanowicz <https://www.liberatingstructures.com/bookstore>
    <https://www.liberatingstructures.com/>  
- Project structures
  - Fang, Clara, Jessica Hench, Christa Daniels, and Abigail Abrash.
    Walton. Centering Equity in Climate Resilience Planning and Action:
    A Practitioner’s  
    Guide. Climate-Smart Communities Series, Vol. 3. Antioch University
    New England 2022. <https://dx.doi.org/10.25923/765q-zp33> -
    community co-production guide  
- Continued community building
  - The Art of Community (2009) Jono Bacon
    <https://www.jonobacon.com/books/artofcommunity/> - building free
    and open source community  
  - Center for Scientific Collaboration and Community Engagement. (2020)
    [The CSCCE Community Participation Model – A framework for member
    engagement and information flow in STEM
    communities.](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3997802) Woodley and
    Pratt doi:10.5281/zenodo.3997802 \[website:
    <https://www.cscce.org/resources/cpm/> \]  
  - [ESIP](https://www.esipfed.org/) Resources
    - How to Cluster in ESIP (2020) Megan Carter
      <https://esip.figshare.com/articles/online_resource/How_to_Cluster_in_ESIP/12827963>
      <https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12827963.v1>  
    - Tipsheet for Getting Started as an ESIP Committee Member
      (Accessed 2023) Megan Carter
      <https://docs.google.com/document/d/14EGHLqa3rfH7k3R3LzZiDjBPwl10lT1F72r_wgJEyKM/edit?usp=sharing>  
- How to science
  - The Information Maintainers. Olson, D., Meyerson, J., Parsons, M.,
    Castro, J., Lassere, M., Wright, D., … Acker, A. (2019) Information
    Maintenance as a Practice of Care.
    <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3236409> - the ethics of going slow
    and fixing things in informatics  
  - Akerlof, K. L., Timm, K. M. F., Chase, A., Cloyd, E. T., Heath, E.,
    McGhghy, B. A., et al. (2023). What does equitable co-production
    entail? Three perspectives. Community Science, 2, e2022CSJ000021.
    <https://doi.org/10.1029/2022CSJ000021> - How to define
    co-production

# License, dissemination, and copyright

Content of resulting documentation is property of the named
organization, group, or co-authors. *\[\[Fill in any dissemination
restrictions or expectations for your group\]\]*

This template ([Logistics and notes
template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wnq-LWkG3b6fnLg9EXKGrXasbc3lH0zud0Qe0QUy0Js/edit?usp=sharing))
is © 2022-2024 by Katherine Todd-Brown under CC-0  
<https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/public-domain/cc0/> Please
share freely.  
\![\]\[image1\]

This template was developed with resources from Sociocracy for All
<https://www.sociocracyforall.org/meeting-format/>

Change log

- 202310 - added link to SoFA governance agreement  
- 202308 - added milestones and deliverables template  
- 202307 - Added by row vs by column vs by list headers for the
  templates. Also added template for a performance review  
- 202306 - revised “How we do things” section and added resource list.
  Added template for Log Book. Added description for communications
  recap as well  
- 202305 - added how we do things here  
- 202304 - added optional table format for meeting notes and agenda;
  added reference to Sociocracy for All, change log added  
- 202206 - initial draft
