# 2025 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster

2024-12-31

- [Group purpose statement](#group-purpose-statement)
- [Call in information](#call-in-information)
- [Resources](#resources)
  - [Domain resources](#domain-resources)
  - [Cluster history](#cluster-history)
  - [Relevant links:](#relevant-links)
- [Contacts:](#contacts)
- [Timeline/Calendar](#timelinecalendar)
- [Meeting and communication notes:](#meeting-and-communication-notes)
  - [24 September 2025](#24-september-2025)
  - [25 June 2025](#25-june-2025)
  - [28 May 2025](#28-may-2025)
  - [23 April 2025](#23-april-2025)
  - [26 March 2025](#26-march-2025)
  - [26 February 2025](#26-february-2025)
  - [Meeting date and time with
    timezone](#meeting-date-and-time-with-timezone)
  - [Descriptive title of com
    summary](#descriptive-title-of-com-summary)
- [Introductions](#introductions)
  - [Kathe Todd-Brown](#kathe-todd-brown)
- [How we do things](#how-we-do-things)
  - [Organizational resource list](#organizational-resource-list)
- [License, dissemination, and
  copyright](#license-dissemination-and-copyright)

# Group purpose statement

The purpose of The Soil Ontology and Informatics Cluster is to provide a
community of practice to coordinate the development of soil informatics
best practices and resources. To do this we will meet monthly for
presentations about semantic resources and soil harmonization projects.

# Call in information

**The meetings listed here should be reflected in the ESIP calendar**  
[**https://www.esipfed.org/community-calendar/**](https://www.esipfed.org/community-calendar/)

**Meetings will be every 4th Wednesday of the month at 1200
US-Eastern**  
*You need to register via the link in the community calendar to get the
zoom information.*

Asynchronous participation is encouraged

- ESIP slack channel \#soil-info.
  <https://esip-slack-invite.herokuapp.com/>  
- <http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics>

# Resources

- Webpage: <https://www.esipfed.org/get-involved/collaborate/soil>  
- Mailing list (recaps and announcements primarily, low traffic)
  <http://lists.esipfed.org/mailman/listinfo/esip-soil-informatics>  
- Slack \#soil-info on esip-all.slack.com
  <https://join.slack.com/t/esip-all/shared_invite/zt-1kxf7dlbr-Pmo_31FwJlpNNSl5MtOPMA>  
- YouTube channel:
  <https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5_i8iJW_fzrdsUBR6cBs3LT5Tz>

## Domain resources

- Reference list: [Current soil data
  landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing)  
- Github presentation recaps:
  <https://github.com/ktoddbrown/soil_semantic_resources> \[Note: plans
  to transfer to ESIP after draft phase\]  
- Cluster publications
  - Past publication:
    <https://bg.copernicus.org/articles/19/3505/2022/bg-19-3505-2022.html>  
  - Soil data paper (request permissions from Kathe Todd-Brown \<\>)
    <https://www.overleaf.com/project/6319fa0b0a11a9973a36367a>  
- 

## Cluster history

Initial documents:

- Cluster proposal: [ESIP Soil Ontology and Informatics Clustering
  proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wyplA7K7IHIY_yPXTydfFYNTwiXyrZY2R_9lu3LjRhk/edit?usp=sharing)  
- Cluster purpose:
  [SoilOnt-Purpose](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Fx4B1oLamhacp-bujAL2UrKaTBcSe_gGocaOUYJ_zpA/edit?usp=sharing)

No longer active

- Cluster wiki page:
  <https://wiki.esipfed.org/Soil_Ontologies_and_Informatics>

Past year cluster notes:

- [2024 Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster - Meeting
  notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wj4fbPuTAidrdlAHzW16iJUo49KO0JcQCrgMkqXDL-M/edit?usp=sharing)  
- [2023 Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster - Meeting
  Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C8MYnr2NWwNhoYTQ-2IXE0h0NfflF8zXEonpabY_s8I/edit?usp=sharing)  
- [2022 Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP Cluster - Meeting
  Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12OtoXo6YV4zK9a79VeJK8XE7iEf02hF9Uf-ggQ8YlG4/edit?usp=sharing)  
- [2021 Meeting Notes - Soil ontology and informatics - ESIP
  Cluster](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_SIm_3e9xpni_64zdAU1DZrFEd8YcIerbsihDJq4qwY/edit?usp=sharing)  
- [2020 Soil ontology - Notes and
  Agend](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1w3ScPH6tZCIRcKFiP-BYCa1UihYPei0aL0PcvandV4c/edit?usp=sharing)

## Relevant links:

Main folder:  
[ESIP SOI -
RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) -
Add your name and write “here” under the current date. Please also
scroll down and add a brief
[Introduction](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C8MYnr2NWwNhoYTQ-2IXE0h0NfflF8zXEonpabY_s8I/edit#heading=h.ermsffl4ckxm)
below the notes and recaps.

# Contacts:

[ESIP SOI -
RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) -
Add your name and write “here” under the current date. Please also
scroll down and add a brief
[Introduction](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C8MYnr2NWwNhoYTQ-2IXE0h0NfflF8zXEonpabY_s8I/edit#heading=h.ermsffl4ckxm)
below the notes and recaps.

**Core decision team (points of contact)**: Kathe Todd-Brown
\<[](mailto:)\>

# Timeline/Calendar

| Meeting Date | Topic/Title | Presenter |
|:---|:---|:---|
| [26 February](#26-february-2025) | [*Open discussion*](#26-february-2025) | – |
| [26 March](#26-march-2025) | Soil data semantics work/paper update | Brandon Whitehead |
| [23 April](#23-april-2025) | Alaska Soil Data Bank | Nic Jelinski |
| [28 May](#28-may-2025) | GloSIS: where it stands, where it is heading | Luís de Sousa |
| [25 June](#25-june-2025) | *Ashley will present her work on [bulk density calculation methods as they relate to SOC estimates](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10533-025-01235-6) — Bulk density calculation methods systematically alter estimates of soil organic carbon stocks in U.S. forests* | [Ashley Lang](https://www.ashleyklang.com/) |
| *July* | *SKIP For ESIP July Meeting* | *–* |
| 27 August | SKIP For summer break | – |
| [24 September](#24-september-2025) | Review of the year | – |
| 22 October | Annual close out and next steps |  |

# Meeting and communication notes:

## 24 September 2025

| Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|
| 2 | **Opening** Review and consent to agenda Roll call [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) Confirm notetaker (Debasish) Confirm next meeting October 22 |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** - Showing up… \[<https://feelingswheel.com/> excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] |
|  | –No notes– |
| 5 | **Information** - Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  | [Videos from July meetings](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8X9E6I5_i8gkfxDKDXMIJNw7L1GbjmiT&feature=shared%20) are up [ESIP fellows applications](https://www.esipfed.org/student-opportunities/community-fellows/) are open [TGI Geospatial food security](https://www.taylorgeospatial.org/strategic-iniatives/food-security/landing?utm_source=email-newsletter&utm_medium=organic&utm_campaign=August-25) funding call is out |
| 5 | **Sensmaking** - What have we done? What have we done this year? |
|  | Invited Talks on four different topics/aspects Paper update form Brandon GloSIS update that got posted from Alaska Soil Data Bank by Nic Bulk density calculations/uncertainties from Forest Service FIA |
| 10 | **Formulation** - How has it gone? |
|  | Consistent positive progress with this group Really well structured Consistent participation 6-12 with few cancelations Hard to make the schedule work but notes and videos have been fantastic Dedicated youtube videos/playlist help Very focused but hard to attract active participation Fewer people participating compared to past years Multi-step meeting registration is hard Months’ cadence was easier to forget about CDI might be good place to draw on Felt more disconnected compared to previous year Can there be a cluster-specific listserv? |
| 15 | **Formulation** - What are some things that we want to do? What do we want to carry forward? What do we want to change? |
|  | White list regular cluster members to get zoom invites without registration Generate/archive public list of resources: [Current soil data landscape](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14hF5Xubd1dny7g2aK2CSReXBzaM1P9pkiP0b_TUZS8g/edit?usp=sharing) Moving away from wiki GitHub/Zenodo will be preferred in future for resources Consider moving over to GitHub for notes and documentation GitHub is great! Higher barrier to entry - google doc is much easier Likely a multi-tool solution Zoom notes Github as artifacts space rather then notes Purpose of cluster should standout Current state of the cluster working group Mix up meeting formats Seminars Updating landscape Mixer style meetings More frequent bi-weekly format Zoom notes feature can be used for notetaking Analysis of how usable databases are Is there a standardizable already? Existing check list In line with ESIP’s “How to cluster” documentation Restate the purpose for the cluster Searching for cluster head/lead/chair - reach out to Kathe |
| 5 | **Check out** - What are you leaving this meeting with? \[discovery, future work, feelings …\] |
|  |  |

## 25 June 2025

| Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|
| 2 | **Opening** Review and consent to agenda Roll call [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) Confirm notetaker (Debasish) Next meeting No JULY; August Recording presentation to post to YouTube? YES |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** - Showing up… \[<https://feelingswheel.com/> excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] |
|  | –No notes– |
| 10 | **Information** - Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  | ESIP meeting schedule: <https://2025julyesipmeeting.sched.com/> |
| 20 | **Presentation:** Bulk density calculation methods systematically alter estimates of soil organic carbon stocks in U.S. forests |
|  | 55% of C in soil Measured: Tree diameters, and associated geophysical parameters Soil samples CONUS wide (up to 20 cm depth) SOC = Carbon Conc\*Bulk Density \*thickness of core\*Conversion factor Bulk density can be calculated in different ways (for example, total, hybrid and fine BD) Sensitive to coarse fragments May lead to overestimation of SOC by ~32% Reference: [Bulk density calculation methods systematically alter estimates of soil organic carbon stocks in United States forests](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10533-025-01235-6) Hardwood forests in general had more SOC than softwood forests Highest uncertainties in C stock estimations across western CONUS |
| 10 | **Clarifying questions (Recorded)** |
|  |  |
| 10 | **Open discussion (not recorded)** |
|  |  |
| 5 | **Check out** - What are you leaving this meeting with? \[discovery, future work, feelings …\] |
|  |  |

## 28 May 2025

| Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|
| 2 | **Opening** Review and consent to agenda Roll call [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) Confirm notetaker (Debasish) Next meeting June Recording presentation to post to YouTube? Yes |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** - Showing up… \[<https://feelingswheel.com/> excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] |
|  | –No notes– |
| 10 | **Information** - Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  | July meeting is coming up keep an eye on registration deadlines NEON (US established station network for long term datasets) has now heard of GLOSIS :D |
| 20 | **Presentation:** GloSIS: where it stands, where it is heading by Luís de Sousa (recorded) |
|  | Established in 2012 - to raise awareness on importance of soil 5 Pillars: Soil management, Awareness raising, Research, Information and Harmonization [SOSA: A lightweight ontology for sensors, observations, samples, and actuators](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2018.06.003) [Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS)](https://www.isko.org/cyclo/skos) Two main sources: World Soil Information Service (WoSIS) and Africa Soil Profiles (AfSP) [The template for a Semantic SensorThings API with the GloSIS use case](https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-4-W12-2024-29-2024) Open Challenge: Methodology of measuring soil properties might affect their values [Global soil respiration database](https://daac.ornl.gov/SOILS/guides/SRDB_V5.html) Book: [Spatial Linked-Data Infrastructures](https://linked-sdi.com/LinkedSDI.html) |
| 10 | **Clarifying questions (Recorded)** |
|  |  |
| 10 | **Open discussion (not recorded)** |
|  | What kind of search would you run to find them in natural language? What were the parameters you were looking for? I hope this makes sense. We are experimenting with automated annotations and would like some meaningful searchers that we can run against those extended metadata. Any thoughts? [Ecological Metadata Language (EML)](https://eml.ecoinformatics.org/) |
| 5 | **Check out** - What are you leaving this meeting with? \[discovery, future work, feelings …\] |
|  |  |

## 23 April 2025

| Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|
| 2 | **Opening** Review and consent to agenda Roll call [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) Confirm notetaker (Debasish) Confirm next meeting May Recording presentation to post to YouTube? |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** - Showing up… \[<https://feelingswheel.com/> excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] |
|  | –No notes– |
| 10 | **Information** - Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  | Cascade climate: <https://cascadeclimate.org/blog/erw-field-grant-awardees> |
| 20 | **Presentation:** Alaska Soil Data Bank by Nic Jelinski (recorded) |
|  | NRCS funded under Soils 2026 Initiative: Larger Objective: To create digital soil map for entire US Alaska is important: Infrastructure, Soil Carbon, ground ice content, soil pH and more Harmonize between NRCS and non-NRCS datasets to support digital soil mapping Brings together both public and private data Transparent sourcing of raw data Enrichment & enhancement of metadata Structured in 5 levels: Level 0: Raw Data Level 1: Cleaned Data Level 2: Schema map and ID Level 3: Error corrected Data Level 4: Validated Data Level 5: Consolidated Data \> 80,000 data point sources compiled Mix of variables (some may have carbon, some may have soil profile data, etc.) Developed a “Pedon Morphological model” Includes digitization and rasterization |
| 10 | **Clarifying questions (Recorded)** |
|  | How is geo-precision quantified? 5 level geospatial quality ranking |
| 10 | **Open discussion (not recorded)** |
|  | Is any information lost during the “Pedon Morphological model” process? No, the workflow works more as a pointer [Ecological Metadata Language (EML)](https://eml.ecoinformatics.org/) For creating metadata: <https://ezeml.edirepository.org/eml/auth/login> |
| 5 | **Check out** - What are you leaving this meeting with? \[discovery, future work, feelings …\] |
|  |  |

## 26 March 2025

| Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|
| 2 | **Opening** Review and consent to agenda Roll call [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) Confirm notetaker (Debasish) Confirm next meeting April 23 |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** - Showing up… \[<https://feelingswheel.com/> excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] |
|  | –No notes– |
| 10 | **Information** - Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  | <https://ejpsoil.eu/knowledge-sharing-platform/deliverables> <https://ejpsoil.eu/knowledge-sharing-platform/soil-data-1> |
| 20 | **Decision:** Questions for Brandon (Semantics Paper) |
|  | Stevan: How to use soils as a vehicle to convey bigger concepts, and need to consider the audience in the sense of a soil ecologist to a semantic scientist! Tanja: What is missing relative to other ontologies and what are the holes? (multiple depths, dynamic properties, methods). Use additional papers then to address these missing bits. The examples of texture and bulk density are truly useful. (CATENAs. How do we link series/landscape units) Fenny: Terminologies must be well explained - even soil scientists might not understand all terms! |
| 5 | **Update:** July Meeting/Communication Manager Position Open |
|  | Session proposal for the July meeting will be open next week. The submission deadline is 11:59 pm PT on Thursday, May 15. Applications for the ESIP Communications Manager position are being accepted. |
| 5 | **Check out** - What are you leaving this meeting with? \[discovery, future work, feelings …\] |
|  |  |

## 26 February 2025

| Minute | Item |
|:---|:---|
| 2 | **Opening** Review and consent to agenda Roll call [ESIP SOI - RollCall](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k5-3S1VTPbbeVEIXsyvQbEKG2cRQnvE2jfW__zN_pe8/edit?usp=sharing) Confirm notetaker (Debasish) Confirm next meeting March 26 |
|  |  |
| 3 | **Check in** - Showing up… \[<https://feelingswheel.com/> excited, sick, tired, distracted,…\] |
|  | –No notes– |
| 10 | **Information** - Anything new that you’ve heard related to this group that you would like to share? |
|  | Soil-DRAH - Data rescue with protocol for checks (Hawaiian Data) New paper out on [QUDT](https://www.qudt.org/) evaluation and gaps for extension <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-025-04587-8> ESIP Tracking physical samples [cluster](https://wiki.esipfed.org/Physical_Sample_Curation) - Stevan |
| 10 | **Formulate -\> Decision**: Review new org document What is missing? |
|  |  |
| 20 | **Decision:** What is our plan for 2025? |
|  | Brandon: Sending emails to people for invited Talks on Semantics and Ontologies (Example - Coastal Carbon Network or CCN); working on review paper on soil data semantics Reached out to Simon Cox, Megan Wong, Kathi Schlidt, James Holmquist, Adam Shepherd |
| 5 | **Update:** Data stewardship collection of data management plan examples |
|  | From email from Elisha Wood-Charlson: <https://github.com/ESIPFed/esipDMP> Aloha all, As we try to navigate a changing landscape, we’ll keep trying to make ESIP data better! The Data Stewardship Committee and Marine Data Cluster continue to strategize how to best support the ESIP community in creating “Impactful Data Management Plans.” A small working group has taken great community feedback from our ESIP Winter session (thank you everyone!), and built out a plan to demonstrate a preliminary ESIP DMP data portal during the Summer meeting. We would LOVE your contributions, with many ways to contribute. (*group leads, please be sure to read \#3 below*) **Do you have a funded DMP that you are proud of and can share with us?** Note: we might ask to make sections that demonstrate “best practices” public for demonstration. **Do you have a passion for DMPs and want to join our small committee?** Everyone is welcome! Roadmap: collect DMPs, review for “best practice examples”, design and build GitHub repo for sharing (likely similar to BioData Standards), run summer session for user feedback. **Join a cluster meeting in the next few weeks** - we will be making rounds to speak with various groups about DMPs. Examples, suggestions, etc. So far, we plan to hit up the following (group leads, please let me know if the suggested call isn’t the best time!): |
| 5 | **Check out** - What are you leaving this meeting with? \[discovery, future work, feelings …\] |
|  |  |

## Meeting date and time with timezone

**Purpose:** *What is the purpose of this meeting? Folks can use this to
decide if they need/want to attend. Could be dropped if attendance is
expected.*

**Recap:** *100 words or less, what did we talk about?*

[Agenda
templates](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1abKp5AORYx5k5O_5xGw9xLi5t5wWs-8xObceFeSRyNs/edit?usp=sharing) -
*Create a template for your common meeting purposes and copy/paste them
into your document. You can also refer to the templates in here that
include: seminars, journal clubs, small group meetings, interconnected
circle meetings, group policy development, and reviews.*

## Descriptive title of com summary

**Date:** *Day of communication or summary generation*  
**Point of contact:** *person to direct questions to*

*Some communications (emails often) are of general interest to the
circle but not discussed in meetings. Place summaries of these
communications here in the note document within the timeline of the
meeting agendas and notes. Remember to provide both the context of the
communication as well as the relevant outcomes/information.*

# Introductions

*Who are you? What is your affiliation? Why are you here and what can
you offer?*

## Kathe Todd-Brown

# How we do things

This group is grounded in slow science and relationship-centric. It may
move slower and be more ambiguous than a product driven top-down
approach. We use our research activities here as a vehicle for
discussion, professional networking, and relationship building. We hope
that you find your engagements here to be a deep and rich experience.  
To embody these principles we will communicate our agenda’s ahead of
time, invite regular feedback on how we operate, listen to everyone
invited to the table, object when a decision would negatively impact our
work (and not object when it merely is a preference), and generally
strive to make strategic decisions as a group while recognizing the
operational roles of the individual. We hope that you find this a
rewarding experience!

As an ESIP Cluster we adhere to the [ESIP Code of
Conduct](https://wiki.esipfed.org/ESIP_Code_of_Conduct) and [Community
Participation Guidelines -
ESIP](https://www.esipfed.org/about/community-guidelines/) .

## Organizational resource list

- Todd-Brown Lab organizational template
  - Logistics and notes template: [Logistics and notes
    template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wnq-LWkG3b6fnLg9EXKGrXasbc3lH0zud0Qe0QUy0Js/edit?usp=sharing)  
  - Agenda templates: [Agenda
    templates](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1abKp5AORYx5k5O_5xGw9xLi5t5wWs-8xObceFeSRyNs/edit?usp=sharing)  
  - Decision log book: [Decision log
    template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ncEDlVYsFJu9oubyj8I2kJL7KiaClttOSkVqzxWywLk/edit?usp=sharing)  
  - Performance reviews: [Individual Review
    Template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uqonOb-8ktLFf1ZEuF2dBvbbQ3duYUxiJ9jyjfWB3Xo/edit?usp=sharing)  
  - Milestones and deliverables: [Milestones and deliverables
    template](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/10ZmjN-3qJb9CGDUU01fTrkYf741iv7_uVODnhTVWbP8/edit?usp=sharing)  
  - Workflow example: [Policy development
    workflows](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1HhG1ckLUGvmOMljzbbpyLeLQ6GVuTQuG6XdNyuxsha4/edit?usp=sharing)  
  - Circle membership: [Circle
    tracker](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/16GfXn-YPKXxE6mXTuhq1-1RgnNQVZ37fbsLRqC3w8OI/edit?usp=sharing)  
  - Governance document: [Governance Agreement
    \[template\]](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11Z__hJNt53ayMBEz8BRbPW3GkoYl-Oh0GGAqHpxOmy4/edit?usp=sharing)
    \[\[under development\]\]
    - *a incentives-development project (USA USDA) [HiCSC Governance
      Agreement
      \[public\]](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RruX6mIYRI2Csu3NMCOQLQrOSeFgt1YFAxVSvP5QH4Q/edit?usp=sharing),*  
    - *a non-profit organization [SoFA Governance Agreement
      \[public\]](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pKxeJ3HAk4GimnDbZwK0CGhBdPMpN_oDE5s-TYBYqfw/edit?usp=sharing),*  
    - *a research project management plan (USA NSF) [Project Management
      Plan_Example2022.docx](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Ia6pLEibNKhOag8Gpb-5p_scRvxlXQ0d/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=109852630871978264620&rtpof=true&sd=true)*  
- Governance
  - Who Decides Who Decides: ​​How to start a group so everyone can have a
    voice! (2021) Ted Rau
    <https://www.sociocracyforall.org/who-decides-who-decides/>  
  - Community Rules: Simple Templates for Great Communities (2021)
    Cassandra Dana, Drew Hornbein, Vincent Russell, and Nathan
    Schneider. \[booklet and citation\]
    <https://www.colorado.edu/lab/medlab/2021/07/15/community-rules-simple-templates-great-communities>.
    \[website\] <https://communityrule.info/>  
- Hosting one-off events
  - The Art of Gathering: How We Meet and Why It Matters (2018) Priya
    Parker <https://www.priyaparker.com/book-art-of-gathering>  
  - Guide to organizing Inclusive Science Meetings from 500 Women
    Scientists (no date, vs 1.2)
    <https://500womenscientists.org/inclusive-scientific-meetings>  
- Meeting structures
  - The Surprising Power of Liberating Structures: Simple Rules to
    Unleash A Culture of Innovation (2014) Keith McCandless and Henri
    Lipmanowicz <https://www.liberatingstructures.com/bookstore>
    <https://www.liberatingstructures.com/>  
- Facilitation and conflict
  - Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life: Life-Changing Tools
    for Healthy
    Relationship[s](https://bookshop.org/p/books/nonviolent-communication-a-language-of-life-life-changing-tools-for-healthy-relationships-marshall-b-rosenberg/10180253?ean=9781892005281) (2015)
    Marshall B. Rosenberg
    <https://bookshop.org/p/books/nonviolent-communication-a-language-of-life-life-changing-tools-for-healthy-relationships-marshall-b-rosenberg/10180253>  
  - [Dealing with Disruptive
    Behaviors](https://coast.noaa.gov/data/digitalcoast/pdf/met-facilitating-disruptive.pdf)
    from the Planning and Facilitation Collaborative Meeting Training.
    NOAA Office for Coastal Management. (10-2018)  
- Project structures
  - Fang, Clara, Jessica Hench, Christa Daniels, and Abigail Abrash.
    Walton. Centering Equity in Climate Resilience Planning and Action:
    A Practitioner’s  
    Guide. Climate-Smart Communities Series, Vol. 3. Antioch University
    New England 2022. <https://dx.doi.org/10.25923/765q-zp33> -
    community co-production guide  
- Continued community building
  - The Art of Community (2009) Jono Bacon
    <https://www.jonobacon.com/books/artofcommunity/> - building free
    and open source community  
  - Center for Scientific Collaboration and Community Engagement. (2020)
    [The CSCCE Community Participation Model – A framework for member
    engagement and information flow in STEM
    communities.](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3997802) Woodley and
    Pratt doi:10.5281/zenodo.3997802 \[website:
    <https://www.cscce.org/resources/cpm/> \]  
  - [ESIP](https://www.esipfed.org/) Resources
    - How to Cluster in ESIP (2020) Megan Carter
      <https://esip.figshare.com/articles/online_resource/How_to_Cluster_in_ESIP/12827963>
      <https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12827963.v1>  
    - Tipsheet for Getting Started as an ESIP Committee Member
      (Accessed 2023) Megan Carter
      <https://docs.google.com/document/d/14EGHLqa3rfH7k3R3LzZiDjBPwl10lT1F72r_wgJEyKM/edit?usp=sharing>  
- How to science
  - The Information Maintainers. Olson, D., Meyerson, J., Parsons, M.,
    Castro, J., Lassere, M., Wright, D., … Acker, A. (2019) Information
    Maintenance as a Practice of Care.
    <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3236409> - the ethics of going slow
    and fixing things in informatics  
  - Akerlof, K. L., Timm, K. M. F., Chase, A., Cloyd, E. T., Heath, E.,
    McGhghy, B. A., et al. (2023). What does equitable co-production
    entail? Three perspectives. Community Science, 2, e2022CSJ000021.
    <https://doi.org/10.1029/2022CSJ000021> - How to define
    co-production

# License, dissemination, and copyright

Content of resulting documentation is property of the ESIP SOI Cluster.
Information here should be considered public record.

The template this is based off of the [Logistics and notes
template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wnq-LWkG3b6fnLg9EXKGrXasbc3lH0zud0Qe0QUy0Js/edit?usp=sharing)
© 2022-2024 by Katherine Todd-Brown \<[](mailto:)\>, released under
CC-0  
<https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/public-domain/cc0/>. Please
share freely !

These template was developed with resources from Sociocracy for All
<https://www.sociocracyforall.org>

Change log

- 202501 - add Nonviolent Communication to the resource list  
- 202411 - added project management example and made governance doc
  examples into a list; simplified contacts list; minor wordsmithing
  with license section  
- 202410 - added RACI matrix citation and explanation  
- 202409 - moved templates down to references and added space for shared
  files listing  
- 202405 - added workflow draft for complex policy development  
- 202404 - added alternative ‘how we do things’ text and link to HiCSC
  governance agreement; also added reference to circles in the purpose
  statement  
- 202402 - added reference and organized references into categories.  
- 202312 - added link to circle membership tracker, modify SoFA
  attribution  
- 202310 - added link to SoFA governance agreement  
- 202308 - added milestones and deliverables template  
- 202307 - Added by row vs by column vs by list headers for the
  templates. Also added template for a performance review  
- 202306 - revised “How we do things” section and added resource list.
  Added template for Log Book. Added description for communications
  recap as well  
- 202305 - added how we do things here  
- 202304 - added optional table format for meeting notes and agenda;
  added reference to Sociocracy for All, change log added  
- 202206 - initial draft

Please help with the improvement of this template by filling out a brief
survey:
<https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSeinRM0JoOFqnAQPhWpIOAPDsu2eclg1R2jQ4S_eSawJfQKDg/viewform?usp=sf_link>
or contact Kathe Todd-Brown \<\>
